How a Second Grader Beats Wall Street: Golden Rules Any Investor Can Learn
Allan S. Roth

Introduction The Seeds of Financial Success
LOCATION: 372

everything we need to know about investing, we’ve learned by second grade. It’s what we learn after second grade that turns out to be so destructive.
LOCATION: 395

To a child, money is only as important as what can be bought with it. It’s a means to an end—something that’s used to obtain candy or a new video game. Adults care about money in a material and an abstract sense; historically, we adults have placed enormous value on accumulating as much of it as we can. To us, money is a new house or car, but it is also freedom or security.
LOCATION: 407

By following the golden rules presented in this book, we can simplify our thinking and stop doing the things that needlessly set our financial goals back.
LOCATION: 418

For those who don’t believe simple is better, remember that both Albert Einstein and Sir Isaac Newton, considered to be perhaps the two smartest humans in history, were known to state that brilliance lies in simplicity rather than complexity.
LOCATION: 523

Chapter 1 The Claw Will Take Your Money
LOCATION: 551

Paying Wall Street is a loser’s game. Your odds are probably better with the claw.
NOTE: "the claw" arcade game
LOCATION: 586

The arguments for active management have two things in common: 1. They are emotionally appealing. 2. They fly in the face of simple mathematics.
LOCATION: 602

An important item to note is that Kevin’s advantage isn’t dependent on whether the market goes up or down; it’s dependent only on the difference in expenses that he is paying versus the Wall Street average expense.
LOCATION: 633

second important item is that this argument of simple arithmetic is not dependent on the efficient market hypothesis. It doesn’t matter one iota whether stocks are efficiently priced or wildly misvalued. The only thing that matters is that all investors—you and me—cannot be above average and that 10 − 2 must equal 8! So, forget the debate about the efficient market hypothesis and remember the second-grader hypothesis that 10 − 2 = 8. Of course, this is adapted from Jack Bogle’s cost matters hypothesis.
LOCATION: 635

every argument made for keeping fees low in the stock market applies just as stringently in the bond market. That is, the average bond investor will get the average bond return before expenses. Thus, owning the entire bond market at the lowest costs must yield a return that beats the more expensive professionally managed portfolios.
LOCATION: 654

Sharpe states, “Properly measured, the average actively managed dollar must underperform the average passively managed dollar, net of costs.”
LOCATION: 661

When it comes to picking an investment professional, the following analogy may click for you: If you needed heart surgery, you wouldn’t go bargain hunting for a surgeon. This analogy breaks down when you consider the nature of both professions.
LOCATION: 679

If my mutual fund manager purchases a stock from yours, my manager’s gain (or loss) comes at a direct cost (benefit) to yours—for every investor who beats the market in a given year, there is another who’s lost by the same amount.
LOCATION: 683

Applying the Golden Rule: 10 − 2 = 8
NOTE: GR #1
LOCATION: 754

if the basis of your investment plan goes against simple arithmetic, you are on the losing end of the claw game.
LOCATION: 756

Always remember that market return less costs equals the average investor return. If your costs aren’t the lowest available, then mathematics will not be on your side and you should expect an uphill battle. Your Wall Street advisor may make a compelling pitch as to why the strategy will work, but if it goes against the golden rule of simple arithmetic you are likely making someone else rich.
LOCATION: 766

Chapter 2 Own the World
LOCATION: 771

investing is about measuring risk and increasing that risk only if they can expect a long-term higher return.
LOCATION: 821

Increasing risk without increasing return is speculation, and has no place in investing.
LOCATION: 826

Own the Entire World, Starting with the United States
LOCATION: 854

There is one way, and only one way, to build a stock portfolio that is guaranteed to beat the average dollar invested. For the U.S. stock market, that one way is to buy the entire market in proportion to the value of each company.
LOCATION: 856

owning one total U.S. stock index fund is the most diversified U.S. stock portfolio one can have, irrespective of the number of funds one has. That’s right: It’s impossible to add a second U.S. stock fund that would improve diversification as it could only begin to overweight one of the style boxes or industry sectors.
LOCATION: 906

you must own the entire market in one simple index fund that provides the: Highest level of diversification Lowest costs Highest tax-efficiency
LOCATION: 936

Next, Own the Rest of the World
LOCATION: 946

We could certainly use the Morningstar nine-style box and make sure that we are in every sector in every country, and could easily build an international index portfolio with dozens of funds. But there’s a simpler way to own the entire rest of the world with one fund with the lowest costs and highest tax-efficiency: an international index fund.
LOCATION: 960

unlike the total U.S. stock index fund, these foreign index funds don’t own small-cap stocks. Thus, there is a little hole in Kevin’s portfolio. I’d like the international portion of his stock portfolio to include about 10 percent small-cap stocks.
LOCATION: 973

Own the Entire Bond Market
LOCATION: 982

you have a lot less risk when you lend money to others, because they have to pay it back before they can spend it for their own stuff.5 And because we have less risk, we get a bit lower return.
LOCATION: 985

the bond portfolio should be the cushion and make us more comfortable by lowering the swings in our portfolio. Because foreign currency swings are so big, international bonds can swing more widely and, thus, don’t provide the cushion we are looking for.
LOCATION: 996

The Final Lesson: Think Long-Term
LOCATION: 1033

two types of investors when it comes to predicting next year’s stock market: 1. Those who don’t know. 2. Those who don’t know they don’t know.
LOCATION: 1045

Over a 20-year period, the stock market has always bested inflation. So if we invest now and diversify over a long period of time, the market isn’t so risky.
LOCATION: 1052

The second-grader portfolio was born: 10% Total Bond Market Index Fund 30% Total International Stock Index Fund 60% Total U.S. Stock Index Fund.
LOCATION: 1080

the DFA fund family. This fund family recognizes the research showing that smaller companies and value companies (the lower-left box of the Morningstar Style Box) tend to outperform larger companies and growth companies (the upper-right side), over the long-term. This is commonly known as the Fama and French Three Factor Model,
LOCATION: 1116

the higher historic returns from small-cap value investing are not a free lunch. They are compensation for taking greater risk.
LOCATION: 1120

DFA funds generally can be purchased only through financial advisors. While DFA itself generally has low fees, advisors can add significantly to the total costs being paid. The bottom line is that DFA can also be used to build a broad global portfolio with a little titling toward small-cap and value stocks.
LOCATION: 1122

Applying the Golden Rule of Diversification
NOTE: GR #2
LOCATION: 1128

it’s not the number of mutual funds or ETFs you own that make a diversified portfolio; it’s the number of securities within each of these funds that ultimately determine diversification.
LOCATION: 1129

If you own the entire market, not only are you mathematically certain to beat Wall Street, you will do it with less risk. It’s the ultimate in the lesson we all learned as kids: “Don’t put all of your eggs in one basket!”
LOCATION: 1138

Chapter 3 The Advantage of Having Wall Street Marketing Blinders (and Where Can I Get Some?)
LOCATION: 1140

we adults do it all of the time. We do it because we want to believe it, and we do it because Wall Street has a much larger marketing budget than Santa Claus. Their well-funded illusions make Santa Claus and the Tooth Fairy look like amateurs.
NOTE: Re: believing portfolio managers and other nonsense about beating the market
LOCATION: 1178

Trick #1: Don’t Tell the Investors How Much They Are Paying
LOCATION: 1184

Wall Street’s power has allowed money managers to be very successful in limiting the transparency they must provide to the consumer.
LOCATION: 1187

The consumer can be paying the following fees without realizing it: Fees to their advisor in the form of commissions, paid as a percentage of assets or even on an hourly basis. Front-end or back-end loads to buy and sell a mutual fund or insurance investment. Ongoing fees known as the expense ratio. The expense ratios of many funds often include expensive marketing fees, though Wall Street prefers to use the more obscure term 12b-1 fees for these expenses. Ongoing hidden fees no one has to disclose, such as brokerage fees and buy/ask spreads incurred by mutual funds that churn the stocks in their portfolio.
LOCATION: 1188

Trick #2: Tell the Investors They Are Beating the Market
LOCATION: 1209

the first part of this trick is to compare apples to oranges: the least risky stocks (those in the S&P 500) to the manager’s portfolio.
LOCATION: 1227

The second (and by far most powerful) part of the trick is that the S&P 500 index conveniently strips out the dividend portion of the return.
LOCATION: 1229

Trick #3: Sound as if You Know What You Are Talking About
LOCATION: 1265

impressive talk is a lot easier to achieve than impressive performance.
LOCATION: 1285

the only thing associated with the market’s daily ups and downs that is predictable is the pontifications of analysts who attempt to explain the often unexplainable.
LOCATION: 1300

even the good guys of the profession must continue the active/passive debate to leave open the question as to whether 10 − 2 = 8. If the good guys are creating this illusion, can you imagine what the rest of Wall Street and the media are doing?
LOCATION: 1434

If you are using advisors, ask them how much you are paying in total fees and get them to put it in writing. Make sure they understand that you are not asking them how much they are making off you; it’s far more important to know the total fees you are paying.
LOCATION: 1462

If your fund has turnover of more than 50 percent annually, a safe assumption is that your soft-dollar and hidden turnover costs are also high.
LOCATION: 1473

I tell my prospective clients they can either have the psychological comfort of believing they are beating the market, and take at face value that they are earning above-market returns, or benchmark against the second-grader portfolio.
LOCATION: 1487

To benchmark your portfolio, take all of your investments and categorize them in one of three types of investments: 1. Bonds: individual bonds, bond funds, CDs, money markets, etc. 2. U.S. stocks: individual U.S. stocks or U.S. stock funds 3. International stocks: individual international stocks or international stock funds
LOCATION: 1489

Applying the Golden Rule of Marketing Immunity
LOCATION: 1513

First, people aren’t out to make you rich.
LOCATION: 1518

Determine which is most important to you: (1) feeling good about your investments, knowing that a sophisticated money manager is at the helm who gives you the perception that you are earning above-market returns, or (2) buying the entire market via a second-grader portfolio, and being guaranteed that each of your asset classes will beat the average dollar invested by those same sophisticated money managers.
LOCATION: 1524

Second, simplify your investing.
LOCATION: 1527

Always remember that what you aren’t paying to someone or something else, such as fees and taxes, goes to you and will get you to your financial goals much sooner.
LOCATION: 1536

Chapter 4 Adults Behaving Badly
LOCATION: 1540

knowing we behave irrationally and changing that irrational behavior are two very different issues.
LOCATION: 1548

if we derive more pleasure from something than what it will cost, we make a logical, rational decision to buy it.
LOCATION: 1583

To us adults, though, who are thinking about retirement, seeing the size of our nest egg shrink is painful. The human response to pain is to do whatever is perceived as necessary to get it to stop, or at the very least mask it. So the solution for many is to sell and move everything to cash
LOCATION: 1608

Conversely, watching our stocks go up is pleasurable. The human response to pleasure is to want more, which translates to buying more stocks after they have done well.
LOCATION: 1611

the next time someone is explaining why something happened, remember that brilliance in hindsight doesn’t translate into brilliance in predicting the future.
NOTE: Especially In the stock market
LOCATION: 1633

Our tendency toward optimism is a good thing. It makes us more fun to be around, and even makes us heal faster and live longer. So, for the record, I’m all for optimism, with one little exception—in investing. In this particular arena, the optimism of thinking our odds are much better than they really are can hurt us badly.
LOCATION: 1664

The ironic thing about technical analysis is that the logical conclusion would be that, if they actually worked, they would no longer work in the future. When enough people have a tool to predict stock prices, it ceases to be of any use since the stock would have already reacted to this knowledge.
LOCATION: 1720

Anchoring, by the way, is very important to Wall Street. Wall Street would anchor Kevin’s three-fund index portfolio against the performance of the three corresponding indexes and correctly say his portfolio has absolutely no chance of beating those indexes. That’s how they get you to buy into the myth that indexing is guaranteed to be mediocre. If they actually anchored indexing against the average investor or, better yet, their clients’ average return, they would be out of business.
LOCATION: 1747

framing a problem can impact our decisions. In investing, we frame things incorrectly all of the time.
LOCATION: 1760

Mental accounting is how we trick ourselves into believing that we are doing better than we actually are. Just like the two out of three gamblers in Las Vegas, we tend to remember our brilliant investments and forget our what-were-we-thinking ones.
LOCATION: 1777

heuristic biases are used against us frequently by Wall Street. Just as I did with the simple F-counting exercise, we are led to predictably take shortcuts and confidently make the wrong choices.
LOCATION: 1800

Applying the Golden Rule of Not Acting Silly with Our Money
LOCATION: 1833

The first step of acting more rationally with our money is to admit that we are human, and as such have emotions that may prevent us from acting in our own economic best interests.
LOCATION: 1834

Stop yourself from giving into the human emotions that lead us to buy high and sell low. Set an asset allocation target of U.S. stocks, international stocks, and bonds. Write a contract to yourself that you will stick to your asset allocation. I’ll provide an example at the end of this book.
LOCATION: 1837

Remember that stocks are a better buy after they have declined than when they set new record highs. As Warren Buffett put it, “Be fearful when others are greedy and greedy when others are fearful.”
LOCATION: 1841

We are all brilliant at predicting the past. Don’t let the recent past guide your future investing.
LOCATION: 1844

Remember that the odds are you don’t know the odds.
LOCATION: 1847

We are not all above-average investors, and very few of us will beat the second-grader portfolio. Be happy to consistently beat most investors by owning the entire market with the lowest costs and lowest taxes. You are unlikely to be or even find the next Warren Buffett.
LOCATION: 1850

A pattern that has predicted the future is very different from a pattern that will predict the future. There will always be another great discovery, like Dogs of the Dow, and it will be hailed as a contrarian strategy.
LOCATION: 1853

Any good talking head or financial salesperson can frame an issue by giving you certain information and leaving some critical information out. Ask yourself whether you are looking at the issue with the big picture in mind. Take a devil’s-advocate view and ask your spouse or trusted friend to find a flaw in your logic.
LOCATION: 1856

Never underestimate the human ability to believe what we want to believe. Are you really beating the market? It may be painful, but compare your return to a weighted average of the three funds in the second-grader portfolio.
LOCATION: 1859

How to Keep from Beating Yourself9 1. Avoid the “sure thing.” 2. Don’t invest in what has been hot. 3. Think twice before you act. 4. Don’t follow the herd. 5. Track your feelings.
LOCATION: 1865

Always ask yourself whether you know which part of your brain is in the driver’s seat when making a decision. Is it your emotional, reflexive side or the more logical reflective side? You may never know, but considering these five points will increase the likelihood it’s coming from your logical side.
LOCATION: 1873

After you’ve considered the steps to stop you from beating yourself, you are ready for the final test before you take action. Can you explain what you are doing to a second grader or would he think you were just acting silly?
LOCATION: 1876

Chapter 5 Can You Beat a Second Grader’s Portfolio?
LOCATION: 1878

a typical portfolio has less than a 1 percent chance of beating Kevin’s after adjusting for the allocation that is right for your risk level.
LOCATION: 1914

I deem the Magellan effect to mean that, in reality, the odds of beating the low-cost index are even smaller than you think.
NOTE: Not only are there very few actice funds that beat a passive index over a longer time horizon, there is very likely a small window of opportunity to invest in those winning funds at the right time
LOCATION: 2002

someone with 10 or more mutual funds or private money managers on average has less than a 1 percent probability of beating the index over 25 years.
LOCATION: 2023

Why do we take something as important as building our nest egg, and place a bet that’s nearly certain to lose? There are two reasons:
LOCATION: 2079

1. We don’t know that we don’t know the odds.
LOCATION: 2080

we get the perception that everyone is beating the market and we have to get in on the action.
LOCATION: 2083

We think because we performed well for a short period of time that we can sustain it over the long-run. We don’t know how bad the odds are in the long-run.
LOCATION: 2103

2. We don’t want to know the odds.
LOCATION: 2105

When we hear promises made based on what we want to hear, we suddenly suspend common sense. The feeling of excitement at the possibilities overwhelms us and we are carried forward with it.
LOCATION: 2110

All we want is confirmation that we are making the right decision.
LOCATION: 2112

Applying the Golden Rule of Going with the Odds
LOCATION: 2121

Mathew Emmert wrote in Motley Fool, “The best thing you can do as an investor or a gambler, is to know the odds of the game you’re playing—because not knowing them will cost you.”
LOCATION: 2123

There are three things we investors can do to tip the scales in our favor when betting our nest egg.
LOCATION: 2127

First, don’t bet against simple mathematics. Each dollar of costs you are paying, whether you are seeing it or not, is handing off your wealth to somebody else.
LOCATION: 2128

Second, quit paying taxes that you don’t need to. Active funds and separately managed accounts claim to be tax-efficient. Their constant churning, however, causes investors to pay far more in taxes than the second-grader portfolio, which rarely passes on a capital gain. I’m all for minimizing the U.S. deficit, but lowering taxes via index investing dramatically improves your odds.
LOCATION: 2133

Third (and as Jack Bogle advises), stay the course, whatever that might be for you.
LOCATION: 2136

Don’t pay the 1.5 percent penalty that most investors pay by following the herd. If you can’t stay the course, take Warren Buffett’s advice: “Be greedy when others are fearful and fearful when others are greedy.”
LOCATION: 2140

Chapter 6 Beyond the Second-Grader Portfolio
LOCATION: 2149

If we invest in asset classes that don’t always move up and down together, we can lower our level of risk without giving up one iota of expected return.
LOCATION: 2198

If two stocks move perfectly in tandem in the same direction, they are known as having a perfect positive correlation (or 1.00).
LOCATION: 2206

stock moved in exactly opposite directions. That is known as being perfectly negatively correlated, or having a correlation of −1.00.
LOCATION: 2209

for the most part, we are doing pretty well to get asset classes with low positive correlations, but the concept is still true that the lower the correlations of the assets in our portfolio, the less risk we have.
LOCATION: 2216

having any asset classes with less than a perfect correlation also mathematically lowers risk.
LOCATION: 2229

I think there are two alternative asset classes that add to diversification. These are real estate and precious metals. If done correctly, owning a small percentage of each in one’s portfolio can lower the risk of the entire portfolio.
LOCATION: 2243

How much should one invest in REITs? While this is purely a judgment call on my part, I recommend not going higher than 10 percent of the U.S. equity portion of your portfolio.
LOCATION: 2263

My recommendation is to add REITs only if you meet the following criteria: The value of your stock holdings is substantially higher than the value of your real estate holdings, including your home. You are investing in this asset class for the long run and won’t move in and out based on how you feel or what the Wall Street gurus are saying.
LOCATION: 2270

The long-run reality is that precious metals prices tend to keep up with inflation and produce little real return. However, stocks that mine precious metals have done quite well. See, they can discover new deposits and develop new technologies to mine these metals. That’s why I typically recommend owning the stocks rather than the metals themselves.
LOCATION: 2282

That precious metals mining stocks have the possibility of outpacing inflation and earning a real return isn’t reason enough to buy them. The reason to buy them is that the correlation to the U.S. stock market tends to be relatively low.
LOCATION: 2285

You may be asking how an asset class with a high volatility can actually lower the volatility of the entire portfolio. It turns out that the correlation of asset classes is more important than the absolute volatility of each asset.
LOCATION: 2300

Because this asset class is so volatile, I recommend that it be no more than 10 percent of one’s international portfolio. I use our international allocation for this asset class because most precious metals and mining stocks are foreign,
LOCATION: 2308

remember that the main purpose of these alternative asset classes is not to boost return, but to decrease risk.
LOCATION: 2353

Applying the Golden Rule of Correlations
LOCATION: 2357

The beauty of the three-fund portfolio is that it automatically takes all of those correlations into account and simply builds the global portfolio without having to worry about standard deviations, correlations, Sharpe ratios, and the like. After all, we can enjoy our slice of the pie without knowing how it was made.
LOCATION: 2361

I recommend building a more complex portfolio with REITs and precious metals stock asset classes if, and only if, you understand why they should be a part of your portfolio—to lower overall portfolio volatility.
LOCATION: 2364

Chapter 7 Bonds—Your Portfolio’s Shock Absorber
LOCATION: 2373

A bond is essentially when an investor loans money to an entity (corporate or governmental) for a defined period at a certain interest rate.
LOCATION: 2410

two types of risk associated with bonds—default risk and interest rate risk.
LOCATION: 2435

the higher the default risk, the higher the interest rates bonds must pay.
LOCATION: 2456

In many cases, muni bonds pay less than U.S. government bonds. This isn’t because they are less risky; it’s because they are exempt from federal income taxes and, if they are issued by the state you live in, usually exempt from state tax as well.
LOCATION: 2462

Remember that one of the key roles of bonds is to stabilize our portfolio and protect us from a crisis in the stock market. In times of financial turmoil, lower-quality bonds may default and thus end up being as risky as stocks. It only takes the default of one or two risky bonds to more than erase the benefit of that slightly higher yield.
LOCATION: 2470

When we buy a bond or bond fund, we are buying an income stream up to a fixed date, known as the maturity date, at which time we get paid back all of the money we invested. When we buy this instrument and interest rates go up, the value of our bond goes down. When rates go down, the value of our bond goes up.
LOCATION: 2486

Interest rate risk causes the value of a bond or bond fund to change whether you hold to maturity or sell it on the open market. Interest rate risk increases as the maturity date of the bond increases.
LOCATION: 2505

The longer you hold a bond, the more likely it is that either (1) the entity you loaned money to will become unable to pay you back; or (2) interest rate changes will negatively impact the value of your investment.
LOCATION: 2510

In my view, maturities of about five years tend to be the sweet spot on the risk/reward continuum. Buying bonds with maturities of 30 years is too risky, as any hyperinflationary period would wipe away much of the real value of the bond.
LOCATION: 2515

Faulty argument #1: Bond funds change in value but holding a bond to maturity gets all of your money back.
LOCATION: 2543

Faulty argument #2: A laddered bond portfolio is superior in that it reduces interest rate risk.
LOCATION: 2548

What really matters is the average maturity of your total bond portfolio (or technically the average duration) and nothing more.
LOCATION: 2551

Faulty argument #3: Bonds are just as marketable and liquid as bond funds.
LOCATION: 2554

No-load bond funds, however, don’t incur these trading costs when you sell. In addition, these funds can trade bonds with much lower commissions and spreads than individuals can.
LOCATION: 2561

I’m still leaning against international bond funds for Americans for the following reasons:
LOCATION: 2570

Since the role of the bond fund is to provide stability, the foreign currency risk exposure from an international bond fund is too high. That is to say, we will spend down our portfolio using U.S. dollars rather than euros, yen, or other currencies. Whereas the foreign currency risk can be hedged, the costs of doing this are high.
LOCATION: 2571

I haven’t yet found a diversified total international bond fund with low costs. Thus, while I clearly see value in buying global bonds, the costs of entry are still too high for me relative to the price of buying a diversified U.S. bond index fund.
LOCATION: 2573

Our bond funds should be acting as shock absorbers during down stock markets and the last thing we want is a bond fund that is taking on more risk than our stock funds. Don’t get greedy by chasing that extra little yield.
LOCATION: 2605

Applying the Golden Rule of Lending Money to Someone Who Will Pay You Back
LOCATION: 2607

The role of the bond portfolio is to stabilize our returns and possibly to provide income we can count on. In considering how much stabilization you want, set the proportion of bonds that’s right for you and stick to it. Changing the allocation will likely increase risk and decrease return.
LOCATION: 2609

Buy bond funds rather than the individual bonds themselves. They provide diversification and dramatically decrease the costs of selling, should you need to sell.
LOCATION: 2616

Always buy a low-cost bond fund, because what you don’t pay in costs you receive in higher returns, without taking on more risk.
LOCATION: 2618

Don’t get sucked into muni bonds by blindly concluding you’ll pay less taxes. It’s not the amount of taxes you pay that matters; it’s the amount of after-tax money you get to keep. If you are in the 35 percent tax bracket, a taxable fund paying 5 percent yields 3.25 percent after taxes (5% × (1 − 35%)). This would be more than an equivalent muni bond yielding 3 percent.
LOCATION: 2621

Chapter 8 Better Than Bonds
LOCATION: 2643

the U.S. government stepped in and created the two agencies that guarantee our deposits up to certain limits, and effectively make the default risk of all member institutions zero. That is to say, the default risk of a CD is, for all practical purposes, no greater than the default risk of a U.S. Treasury bond.
LOCATION: 2679

The FDIC and NCUA have effectively eliminated default risk as long as we stick to a member institution and keep below insurance limits.
LOCATION: 2696

This government agency insurance creates a market inefficiency that only smaller investors can exploit. Individual accounts are insured only up to $100,000 on a permanent basis, and this wouldn’t be meaningful for a large institution.
LOCATION: 2703

What to Look for in a CD
LOCATION: 2754

First, never even think about going for that higher rate from an offshore bank or any financial institution that isn’t backed by either the FDIC or NCUA. This may or may not be fine for the risky portion of your portfolio, but is just wrong for the part meant to be your stabilizer.
LOCATION: 2756

Next, look at the terms of the early-withdrawal penalty. The word penalty conjures up some negative thoughts and we always seem to want to avoid them. I actually think penalties can be a good thing and there are times we want to pay them.
LOCATION: 2758

CDs with low early-withdrawal penalties are the ones to find.
LOCATION: 2765

Guide to CD Due Diligence
LOCATION: 2788

Always make sure your funds are insured by going directly to either www.NCUA.gov or www.FDIC.gov. Never get greedy by chasing a higher yield from an uninsured institution.
LOCATION: 2788

Speak to someone at the institution and confirm that they will hold this rate until you are able to get your funds to them.
LOCATION: 2791

Check out the early-withdrawal penalty. Penalties of six months or shorter are generally acceptable.
LOCATION: 2792

Make sure you are dealing directly with the institutions. Many sites fail to mention they charge a hefty fee, which, of course, reduces your return.
LOCATION: 2794

Try not to choose the option of letting the CD automatically renew. You want to be reminded that it’s coming due so you can again shop for the highest rates.
LOCATION: 2795

Always mark the maturity date on your calendar and, a few weeks earlier, be ready to shop for new rates yielding above Treasuries.
LOCATION: 2797

With this strategy, however, we are not making the same mistake of saying we are smarter than the market. We are only taking advantage of a market inefficiency created by the government.
LOCATION: 2830

Applying the Golden Rule of Lending Money If It’s Guaranteed by Someone Trustworthy
LOCATION: 2834

It does take some effort to find the right CDs and stay on top of the maturity dates. And you are not likely to find an investment professional to help you identify the top-paying CDs because there is nothing in it for them.
LOCATION: 2836

Spend a few minutes a day on www.bankdeals.blogspot.com and start getting educated. Compare those rates to rates you see advertised in the local paper. Start comparing those rates to national averages of CDs with similar maturities. These averages can come from many different sources, such as www.bankrate.com
LOCATION: 2848

Make sure to read the CD terms and keep a copy. Relative to prospectuses and insurance policies, they are actually very short and simply written.
LOCATION: 2854

always confirm that the account was set up and opened at the agreed-on rate.
LOCATION: 2867

mark the maturity date on your calendar, as well as a reminder three weeks earlier. You’ll want to start researching rates well ahead of the date your CD matures. If you find a higher rate, let that institution know because it will often match the rate in order to hold onto your funds.
LOCATION: 2869

Chapter 9 Simply Brilliant or Brilliantly Simple—Building Your Portfolio
LOCATION: 2876

Investing is much more than making an investment decision that maximizes our wealth. It also involves minimizing the chances we will run out of money.
LOCATION: 2898

The reason we take risk is that we expect to be compensated in the form of higher returns. In fact, the very foundation of capitalism is the quid pro quo of taking a smart risk with the expectation of getting a greater return in the long run.
LOCATION: 2912

our willingness to take risk isn’t easy to quantify because it is difficult to measure and very unstable.
LOCATION: 2952

studies show that we have an asymmetrical attitude to investing. That is, the pain we feel from losing $10 hurts twice as much as the pleasure we receive from gaining that same amount. In behavioral finance, this is known as prospect theory, and helps to explain why our willingness to take risk is both so hard to measure and so unstable.
LOCATION: 2965

The first step in selecting the allocation that is right for you is to have a realistic understanding of what can happen in the short term.
LOCATION: 2987

As a general rule of thumb, however, I think the mathematical answer is to put any funds you won’t need for more than 10 years into the stock market.
LOCATION: 3017

bonds have a key role in stabilizing our behavior so we don’t move in and out of the market.
LOCATION: 3024

the more we move into and out of the market, the lower our returns end up being.
LOCATION: 3025

Once you decide how much stock market risk you want to take, the next step is to allocate between the United States and international. Here I recommend one-third of one’s total equity portfolio be in international stocks.
LOCATION: 3039

States rather than two-thirds. The judgment I use is that we U.S. residents are going to spend most of our money in U.S. dollars rather than euros, pounds, or yen. Thus, taking on too much foreign currency risk is something we want to avoid.
LOCATION: 3045

you don’t get enough international exposure by just buying U.S. stocks.
LOCATION: 3054

Remember that beaten-up value stocks tend to make better investments than the star growth stocks. The same may be true in that the fastest-growing economies might not be the best investments.
LOCATION: 3059

getting in touch with your feelings is perhaps the most important part of asset allocation and reaching your financial goals.
LOCATION: 3072

Carve out an hour of your time when your investments are doing particularly well. Write down how you are feeling about your financial goals and your ability to take risk. State what you would do if the market went down 30 percent, and whether you are in it for the long run. Then do the very same thing at a point in time when your investments are doing particularly poorly. Talk about these feelings with someone you trust.
LOCATION: 3074

because our memories are short, we end up making the same mistakes. For this reason, it’s very important to get your feelings down in writing.
LOCATION: 3086

Remember that staying with your asset allocation is every bit as important as choosing the right one in the first place.
LOCATION: 3094

You will notice that rebalancing has two traits:
LOCATION: 3125

1. It goes against every human emotion we have in investing. Given that our emotions constantly fail us when it comes to investing, doing the opposite of how we feel may not be such a bad idea.
LOCATION: 3127

2. It forces us out of the ranks of the faux contrarian and into the less-traveled ranks of the true contrarian. That is, since investors consistently chase what’s been hot, rebalancing forces us to sell some of what’s hot and buy some of what’s not.
LOCATION: 3129

Applying the Golden Rule of Not Betting Your Lunch Money
LOCATION: 3138

As rule of thumb, money you need in the next 5 or 10 years generally should be invested in fixed income. The stock market is far too risky for money needed in the short-term—and yes, even 10 years can be considered short-term. Take this risk only if you have no other way of meeting your goal.
LOCATION: 3152

Always keep at least 10 percent of your nest egg in bonds or fixed income. It has very little impact on your long-run returns and can lower overall risk. Never be so sure of your risk tolerance that you put everything in the stock market.
LOCATION: 3155

Conversely, always keep at least 10 percent of your nest egg in equities. Not only will that 10 percent in equities bump your return, it also tends to lower your overall short-term risk.
LOCATION: 3157

Put about one-third of your stock portfolio in international stocks. Do it because we live in a global economy. Don’t do it because international stocks have recently outpaced U.S. stocks.
LOCATION: 3162

Just say no to instruments like preferred stock or convertible bonds. When someone says the word derivative, don’t believe that they are smarter than the market and are delivering market-like returns with less risk.
LOCATION: 3165

Remember to rebalance periodically—perhaps when any of your asset classes varies by more than 10 percent from its target.
LOCATION: 3183

Here are some rules, meant to be as simple as possible, for rebalancing. Because taxes are involved, we have to violate the KISS (keep it simple, stupid) rule:
LOCATION: 3186

1. Don’t wait until you are out of balance and put new money in the asset class underweighted. If you are in the accumulation phase of your life, you are probably putting money in a 401(k) or IRA. You may be investing after-tax dollars as well. Periodically take a look at your overall allocation. If you are a bit overweighted in international stocks, consider putting all new money in bonds and U.S. stocks until you hit the correct balance. Take a look at your accounts every 6 to 12 months.
LOCATION: 3188

2. When you have to sell to rebalance, always look to your tax-advantaged accounts first. When you need to adjust your overall allocation, it’s best to do it in a tax-efficient way. A good place to start is in your tax-deferred accounts. You can buy and sell anything in your 401(k)s, IRAs, and the like without paying the tax collector.
LOCATION: 3192

3. Next, look to long-term capital gains. If you can’t do the rebalancing within the tax-deferred accounts, you are going to pay the tax collector. Realize the long-term gains first, since they’re taxed at a lower rate, which minimizes your tax hit.
LOCATION: 3196

4. What if you have to take a short-term gain to rebalance? Consider breaking the tolerance rule if you have to recognize a short-term capital gain. If you are in a high tax bracket and realizing a short-term gain will result in a large tax bill, consider waiting a bit. If you are only a bit out of the tolerance zone and you are about to hit that magic year-and-one-day on the investment, consider waiting until that short-term gain becomes long term.
LOCATION: 3198

remember the words of Warren Buffett: “Be fearful when others are greedy and greedy when others are fearful.”
LOCATION: 3210

Chapter 10 Investors Who Love to Pay Taxes, and the IRS Who Loves Them
LOCATION: 3212

taxes are just too important to ignore, because the two lessons of paying less taxes and paying them as slowly as possible can create even more wealth for you than low-cost investing alone.
LOCATION: 3264

Lesson #1: Keep Your Tax Rate as Low as Possible
LOCATION: 3266

Lesson #2: When the Government Wants to Lend You Money Interest-Free, Take It!
LOCATION: 3315

while we can’t control what tax rates will be in the future, we can control, at least in this case, when we have to pay those taxes. We can withdraw the funds when our income is the lowest and have a better chance of paying less in taxes.
LOCATION: 3327

the best way to protect yourself from an increasing tax rate is not to avoid tax-efficient investing; it’s to diversify against what Congress may eventually do with tax rates.
LOCATION: 3330

If you think you will be paying at higher tax rates when you withdraw the money, consider Roth IRAs or Roth 401(k)s. They don’t give you the tax deduction immediately, but do allow all of your earnings to be withdrawn completely tax free.
LOCATION: 3331

I often recommend putting some funds in a traditional IRA or 401(k) and some in a Roth IRA or 401(k). This diversifies us against what Congress may eventually do to tax rates.
LOCATION: 3333

locating our assets where they are most tax-efficient can be every bit as important as asset allocation. As a matter of fact, it can result in more wealth, whether the market goes up, down, or sideways.
LOCATION: 3340

we should be overweighting stocks in our taxable accounts and putting bonds in our tax-deferred accounts.
LOCATION: 3348

That’s because stock index funds are very tax efficient, while fixed income and CDs are taxed immediately and at the highest ordinary income rates. Even income provided by the total bond fund is taxed immediately at the highest income tax rates.
LOCATION: 3350

placing fixed income in the taxable accounts fails to: Utilize the lower tax rates on qualified stock dividends and long-term capital gains. Defer paying the taxes on your stocks.
LOCATION: 3352

You want both your fastest-growing and most tax-efficient investments outside of your IRA account.
LOCATION: 3368

This strategy is particularly appealing for those who believe that future tax rates will be higher than today’s.
LOCATION: 3369

Advanced Tax Planning—Tax-Loss Harvesting
LOCATION: 3387

There is one additional investment tax strategy known as tax-loss harvesting. If, for example, you buy the Vanguard Total U.S. Stock Index Fund and the stock market declines, you can get some benefit out of your misfortune in the way of a tax deduction. You can sell this fund and simultaneously buy another fund such as the Fidelity Total U.S. Stock Market Fund. The IRS won’t allow you to buy back the exact same fund within 30 days and you don’t want to be out of the market for that timeframe. A different fund, however, is just fine. The IRS will not allow you to take a loss in your taxable account if you buy the same security simultaneously in you IRA account. Here, a qualified tax advisor can save you from a costly mistake. You need to make sure that you can use this tax loss because they can be used only to offset other gains plus an additional $3,000.
LOCATION: 3389

Applying the Golden Rule of Paying Less Taxes
LOCATION: 3398

For your taxable accounts, I suggest stock index funds. For your tax-deferred accounts, consider CDs, taxable bonds, REITs, and other investments taxed at the highest rates.
LOCATION: 3403

Take every dime the government is willing to lend us interest free by maximizing tax-deferred investing, using such vehicles as the 401(k), IRA, or a host of other government vehicles. Never miss out on any employer match.
LOCATION: 3406

The only reason not to max out tax-deferred investing is that you have the opportunity to instead invest in a Roth 401(k) or Roth IRA. Which is better, the traditional or the Roth, depends on what Congress eventually does with the tax code. Trying to predict what Congress will do, though, is more difficult than timing the market. For that reason, I recommend that most people use both.
LOCATION: 3410

Finally, the mother of all investing tax efficiencies is engineering our portfolio to locate our assets where we get to keep more and pay the IRS less. As a general rule, locate assets as follows: Taxable Accounts Tax-Deferred Accounts Broad stock index funds Taxable bonds Low-turnover stock funds REITs Tax-managed funds CDs High-turnover stock funds Fun gambling stock accounts
LOCATION: 3413

Chapter 11 Nightmare off Wall Street—The Scary Tale of Trick-or-Treat Investing
LOCATION: 3425

As Upton Sinclair put it, “It’s difficult to get a man to understand something if his salary depends on his not understanding it.”
LOCATION: 3531

Unfortunately, the return to the policyholder won’t likely be as good as if they had built the portfolio themselves. See, the insurance company must take the earnings from this conservative portfolio and then carve out: Broker commissions Marketing costs Other operating costs Taxes Insurance company profits What’s left over goes to the policyholders in the form of dividends or income. The obvious point is that buying the portfolio directly, using ultra-low-cost vehicles, would have avoided the extra costs associated with this financial intermediary (the insurance company).
LOCATION: 3546

As one financial planner put it, “Insurance preserves wealth, investments create wealth and confusing the two is a sure way to financial disappointments or outright disaster.”
LOCATION: 3562

If you need life insurance, buy low-cost term insurance. If you take the savings from what you would pay with “permanent insurance” and invest the rest directly, you are likely to be far better off.
LOCATION: 3565

Bypassing the insurance company and investing directly will build up a portfolio that eliminates the need for insurance when your term policy ends.
LOCATION: 3568

The lesson here is that it’s not the amount you pay in taxes that matters; it’s the amount you have left after paying taxes that is critical.
NOTE: Reason why investing in pretax 401k is smart, despite what some people will say
LOCATION: 3681

If we withdraw the money from our retirement accounts when we no longer have earned income, we are likely to be paying taxes in the lower tax brackets.
LOCATION: 3685

The argument for tax-deferred investing is conclusively strong even without an employer match, but if you are walking away from any employer match, you are just throwing money away.
LOCATION: 3694

Applying the Golden Rule of Staying Away from Something Too Good to Be True
LOCATION: 3722

The very first rule is that you must be able to explain what you are doing to a second grader. Albert Einstein once said, “If you can’t explain it simply, you don’t understand it well enough.” Make sure you can explain the following:
LOCATION: 3726

1. How does the product work? I make it a rule never to buy a financial investment I couldn’t describe to an average second grader. In almost every case, a simple investment is better. Complexity creates costs and costs take from your return.
LOCATION: 3729

2. How do others make money when you buy the product? Millions of us seem to believe that an insurance company could invest in low-paying bonds and yet pay us higher returns. We forget to ask ourselves this question and take the bait—hook, line, and sinker. When you understand how others are making money from you, you are more likely to figure out that the better way is to buy direct. Never buy anything indirect when you can bypass the intermediary and eliminate the profit others are making from you.
LOCATION: 3733

3. Does it pass the smell test? Take the rose-colored glasses off and ask yourself why you are being pitched a product.
LOCATION: 3738

Whether it’s oil wells or “investor education” software, ask yourself if they’d be pitching it to you if it were really so good. If it looks too good to be true, it probably is.
LOCATION: 3741

4. What is your exit strategy? Any product that is easy to buy and hard to get out of should raise a red flag. If there are charges to get out of the product, be especially skeptical. If you hear the word surrender as in surrender charges, tip your hat and leave.
LOCATION: 3743

Here’s a little rule of thumb to apply when next you are invited to an investment seminar: The value of the investment advice is inversely related to the quality of the food and libations. Also, never buy a product immediately. Give yourself some time to understand the pros and cons of the investment. Discuss it with your friends, or a second grader if you happen to have one around. Remember, invest in haste, repent in leisure.
LOCATION: 3746

Chapter 12 Increase Your Return No Matter What the Market Does
LOCATION: 3761

Cash
LOCATION: 3806

We let our cash gather cobwebs in some bank, when we’re really only making money for the financial institution.
LOCATION: 3813

Remember, each 1 percent on each $10,000 is worth $100 to you—far more than the price of this book.
LOCATION: 3814

Debt
LOCATION: 3817

If you, like the couple mentioned earlier, happen to be fortunate enough to have enough cash sitting around to pay off all of your debt, you probably should do it. In 99 percent of the cases, you’ll be better off.
LOCATION: 3818

For the rest of us, it’s important to remember that the goal is to pay the least amount of after-tax interest that we can.
LOCATION: 3821

Here are some rules of thumb in paying off debt:
LOCATION: 3836

1. Pay down the most expensive non-tax-deductible debt first. This is usually the credit card debt.
LOCATION: 3837

2. Continue looking for your cheapest and your most expensive pieces of debt. Look to increase a cheap source to pay off an expensive one.
LOCATION: 3842

Equities
LOCATION: 3875

Don’t settle for just any index fund. Find the lowest-cost equivalent fund out there. If your expensive index fund is in a tax-deferred account, make the change today. If it’s in a taxable account and you have a gain, you have a decision of either paying taxes today or paying higher fees for years.
LOCATION: 3889

The Mother of All Low-Hanging Fruit: Asset Location
LOCATION: 3892

Locating our investments where they are most tax efficient can often increase return by more than all of the other sources of low-hanging fruit combined.
LOCATION: 3893

Stock index funds and stocks are very tax efficient and better in your taxable accounts. Your tax-deferred IRA accounts are better suited for your bonds, bond index funds, REITs, and anything taxed at the highest rates.
LOCATION: 3896

Other Sources of Low-Hanging Fruit
LOCATION: 3898

Be sure to look up whether your state gives a tax-deduction for contributions to 529 plans and see whether there is a minimum period the funds need to be invested.
LOCATION: 3905

Another source for seniors is to reapply for social security benefits.
LOCATION: 3908

A little-known law allows beneficiaries to pay back all benefits without any interest and then reset social security payments shortly afterwards.
LOCATION: 3909

And if you are nearing the early social security age and thinking about waiting for the higher benefit—don’t! Take the money and put it in a safe investment, like a money market account or TIPs. Later, you can pay it back without interest and then opt for the higher payment.1 Be sure to monitor whether Social Security is looking at closing that loophole.
LOCATION: 3911

Every dollar saved can go into your nest egg and help you reach financial independence that much sooner.
LOCATION: 3921

Applying the Golden Rule of Picking the Low-Hanging Fruit
LOCATION: 3923

Is your cash working as hard as it can for you, or is it making your financial institution rich?
LOCATION: 3925

Can you get rid of your most expensive debt, either with your cash or with less expensive debt?
LOCATION: 3926

Are you in an expensive index fund that is guaranteed to underperform the least expensive equivalent index fund?
LOCATION: 3927

Do you have your highest-taxed assets located in your tax-deferred accounts? It may feel good to have cash in taxable accounts, but it will cost you more.
LOCATION: 3928

Are you paying an expensive bill on a regular basis without checking to see whether there are alternative options at a much lower price?
LOCATION: 3930

Are their some tax savings that you are missing, such as the example of paying the college via the state 529 college plan?
LOCATION: 3931

Find that low-hanging fruit and, if you’re hesitant to pick it, ask yourself why. You may be fighting one of those mental models like “every adult should have a mortgage.” You may also be fighting inertia.
LOCATION: 3934

Chapter 13 Keep It Simple, Stupid (KISS)
LOCATION: 3937

1. Don’t play a loser’s game by paying money for one expert to outsmart another expert. In investing, you actually get what you don’t pay for. As Albert Einstein put it, “Sometimes one pays most for the things one gets for nothing.”
LOCATION: 4025

2. Don’t put all of your eggs in one basket. We live in a global economy, and spreading our investments across thousands of companies via low-cost index funds does the trick.
LOCATION: 4028

The logical side of your brain may recognize the street signs of simplicity, but the emotional side will surely steer you off course, or off a cliff. Unfortunately, it’s hard to know which side of your brain is in the driver’s seat when you are making a decision.
LOCATION: 4060

Rules for My Gambling Portfolio
LOCATION: 4072

1. Gambling is gambling, whether it’s investing or blackjack. I bet only what I can afford to lose.
LOCATION: 4073

Keep perspective on my wins and losses and the territory they go with—my own version of “what happens in Vegas, stays in Vegas” (or ought to).
LOCATION: 4075

3. Never confuse luck with brilliance.
LOCATION: 4077

4. Always remember rule #1.
LOCATION: 4078

So Wall Street plays a critical role for passive investors. It gives us a free ride in investing, in that we can share in the benefits of the marketplace without paying our share to keep it working.
LOCATION: 4145

Applying the Golden Rule of Second-Grader Investing
LOCATION: 4150

think like a second grader and remember the SECOND acronym:
LOCATION: 4153

Simple. If you can’t explain your investment strategy and every product in your portfolio to a second grader, you are probably doing something wrong.
LOCATION: 4162

Emotionless. We are not in control of our emotions, but the more we can separate them from our investing, the better off we will be.
LOCATION: 4165

If you are getting excitement from your portfolio, you are setting yourself up for a big fall. When you get that irresistible urge to do something, let it pass.
LOCATION: 4168

Costs matter. The average dollar invested in the market will earn the market return, less costs. This is dependent only on simple second-grader arithmetic. Remember, however, that taxes are costs as well. Index funds keep both expenses and taxes at their lowest.
LOCATION: 4169

Obvious. Always take a step back and apply some not-so-common common sense. Put yourself in the shoes of the people selling you a product and ask how they make money. Ask yourself: Can everyone really be above average? It the product is so good, why are they offering it to me? If they really knew how to beat the market, why would they be telling people?
LOCATION: 4171

Nasty stuff. Remember that Wall Street will always be developing new products and sales techniques to separate you from your money.
LOCATION: 4176

Before jumping in, make sure you truly understand it. If an investment professional contacts you with something too good to be true, say what Kevin says: “I’ll have to check with my parents first.”
LOCATION: 4178

Diversification. Spread your nest egg across the globe. Chasing what’s hot is sure to disappoint. There will be more bubbles and the only way I know to avoid them is to own the world. If you are betting on sectors or even countries, you are speculating rather than investing.
LOCATION: 4180

Always remember, the goal of your nest egg is to give you the freedom to do exciting things, not to provide the excitement itself.
LOCATION: 4208
