Superhuman by Habit: A Guide to Becoming the Best Possible Version of Yourself, One Tiny Habit at a Time
Tynan

Introduction
Habits are the closest we can get to having superpowers.

BUILDING HABITS   What is a habit, and why are habits so important?
an action that you take on a repeated basis with little or no required effort or thought.
It's a loophole that allows you to upgrade your health, quality of life, productivity, and enjoyment of the world with a fixed expenditure of energy in creating a habit, rather than an ongoing drain on your willpower.
Although it is possible to build your willpower capacity, we all have a limited amount. One who builds habits channels all of his excess willpower to building habits, which pays off later because he's able to sustain those habits without using any additional willpower.
The glorious benefit of a habit is that it converts something that requires a lot of willpower and focus into something that becomes automatic and often outside of our conscious thought.
We can consciously push ourselves to do a only a certain number of things every day, which means that if we don't have good habits, there is a ceiling to what we can accomplish, personally and a professionally.
By creating habits, we can move things from the “hard” category to the “easy” category, thus freeing up willpower to tackle more of the hard things.
establishing most habits takes the relatively short time of one to twelve months.
Most of our actions stem from subconscious impulse, and those subconscious impulses are the product of our habits.
Because habits are such a fundamental component of who we are, when there is something with which we are discontent, we should examine our habits first.
When we talk about building habits, what we're really doing is replacing the existing habits you have with more useful habits that are aligned with how you want to think and act.
Good habits aren't more difficult to execute than bad habits, they're just harder to build
New habits are things that you do, but old habits are things that you are. There's a difference between waking up early and being an early riser, eating a healthy meal and being a healthy eater, getting some work done and being a productive person.
Each new habit strains our willpower, which means that there is a limited number of new habits that we can have at any given time. Old habits, being automatic and subconscious, can be unlimited.
So, the ultimate process for self-improvement is to add as many new positive habits as possible, working diligently to convert them to old habits and make room for more new habits.
An action whose magnitude is negligible in a single instance becomes a big deal when it's repeated over and over again.
The benefit of a habit isn't the magnitude of each individual action you take, but the cumulative impact it will have on your life in the long term.
When looking through a long-term lens, we can easily see that consistency is the most important factor.
Your results will be commensurate with the consistency with which you execute your habits, not with the magnitude of their one-time impact.
The practical implications of this are twofold. First, be conservative when sizing your new habits.
Second, you should be very scared to fail to execute a habit, even once. By failing to execute, potentially you're not just losing a minor bit of progress, but rather threatening the cumulative benefits you've accrued by establishing a habit.
Whenever you are going to skip executing a habit, force yourself to consciously admit that you're skipping, and articulate why you're skipping. It's easy to half-forget to do something, but it's a lot more difficult psychologically to present yourself with a flimsy argument and to go along with it.
Try to establish as few “outs” for yourself as possible. We are all creative enough to come up with “good reasons” for not doing something that we don't feel like doing.
Any strategy that hopes to create real lasting change must be grounded in reality rather than a Utopian fantasy of what reality could be. You will miss days, you will forget to do things, and in moments of weakness, you will give in to temptation. This happens to even the most grizzled habit builders.
Missing two days of a habit is habit suicide. If missing one day reduces your chances of long-term success by a small amount like five percent, missing two days reduces it by forty percent or so.
When you first miss a habit, the next occurrence of it should become a top priority. You must execute on that habit at any level possible. Do it perfectly if you can, but do it terribly if that's all you can handle. Just make sure that you do it.
When planning a variance, make it concrete, black and white, and specify exactly when the variance will end. For example, instead of doing your regular gym routine while traveling through Europe, you commit to do twenty pushups every morning, and then as soon as you return home, resume your normal routine.
You may be tempted to skip this sort of planning and believe that it is unnecessary, but the lazy energy-conserving part of your brain can be a very powerful enemy.
Just like a marriage, any habit that's intended to last forever will require loyalty through good and bad, sickness and health.
Remember that the power of a habit isn't actually in the individual execution, but in the consistency. It is far far worse to skip doing something than to just do a horrible job of it. This feels wrong and sounds counterintuitive, but it's true.
Our brains are designed for efficiency, which sometimes expresses itself as laziness.
The real danger of not following through with something is that your brain figures out that if it just puts a few small barriers in your way, it can go back to resting. This in itself becomes a habit, which you'll see in people that we might call quitters.
Just do a terrible job if necessary, but make it clear to your brain that putting up token objections isn't enough to give it a rest. If you do this enough, your brain will actually stop trying to sabotage you, and you'll find that you don't get tired when you work, crave sweets when you try to avoid unhealthy foods, or feel like a victim when you should be critically assessing yourself and planning.
Missing a habit is bad. Completely giving up on a habit is really bad. The whole point of building habits, though, is to live a better life. If you beat yourself up and lose self- esteem whenever you fail, that negativity will counteract the positivity of building habits.
We all make mistakes. Even if we try to rarely miss, and never skip the second day, and absolutely never quit habits, we will do all of these things at some point. In fact, if you don't make all of those mistakes at various points, you're probably not challenging yourself enough, which means that you will not reach your potential.
Mistakes will happen, but the most important thing is how you react to them. If successes push you forward, but mistakes also push you forward, you will have a lot more forward progress than if success moves you forward but mistakes pull you back.
Use your mistakes to focus. They draw attention to an area that needs more attention, so give it that attention.
Whenever you stick to a habit, especially if it was difficult or you did particularly well, take two seconds, smile, and congratulate yourself.
It feels silly and trite, but it serves its purpose of releasing endorphins and marking progress. It's a reminder to yourself that you're working on something worthwhile and succeeding at it.
Just as any given instance of executing a habit is insignificant compared to the cumulative benefit, every small piece of your habit-building system combines to create a powerful method of improving yourself.
When evaluating your progress in building habits, you need something consistent to grade yourself against. Use your adherence to process, not your actual results.
Focusing on results, especially short term results, is an excellent way to add stress to your life. That could lead to you quitting the habit associated with that stress, thus ensuring no long term results are ever achieved. Track your adherence to process, not your results.

CHOOSING HABITS
The core skill required for choosing habits, as well as for staying on track once a habit is implemented, is the ability to be brutally honest with oneself.
Being brutally honest is very different from being brutal. It means that you are only satisfied when you figure out which bad habit is really holding you back from your goals, and then you attack that habit by replacing it with a better one.
It is difficult for most of us to admit that we are failing to meet our own standards, especially in areas tied to our self-esteem.
After all, the only two choices are undergoing massive change to meet those standards, or realizing that you're unwilling to rise to the occasion.
It's easy to create habits to improve marginally at things you're already good at, but it's much more difficult to cut to the heart of the issue and begin a new habit that addresses a fundamental core weakness.
The easiest time to choose a habit is when something is a major impediment in your life, or where there's one habit that currently extends its negative influence into other areas of your life.
However, the right habit to tackle is one that you care about.
The best habit is the one you can succeed at, which paves the way for a lifetime of habit building.
The first phase of habits, countering your weaknesses, makes you the best version of yourself. Exploring areas that “just aren't you” is how you expand how you define yourself and take things to the next level.
If you've gotten to the point where you've got the basics covered and you've rounded yourself out, choose whichever habits seem the most fun to you, even if they don't seem very useful. You'll be so adept at this point at building habits, that the enthusiasm for habits that interest you will often be enough to load new habits very quickly.
Not everything is actually your fault, but by assuming it is, you give yourself an opportunity to take responsibility for the future by coming up with a plan to change things. You also over-correct for the bias we all have against believing we are responsible for negative outcomes.
Assuming that everything is your fault is a shortcut for finding those areas where you have control, and opening the door to exerting that control for positive change.
Rather than guilt, discoveries of potential fault should be seen as major opportunities. After all, when you find something in your life that you aren't happy with, and you assume responsibility for it, that also implies a power to change it.
You can do just about anything if you break it down into habits and execute on them. That's not to say that it's easy, only that it's possible. The key is to be honest about what's stopping you from success, take responsibility for it, and create new habits to correct.
It is undoubtedly a good thing to work on both the ability to be an adder and subtracter. However, there's no harm in leaning on your strengths when constructing habits, particularly when beginning work on a new area or when attacking a failed habit from a different angle.
Habits should always be linked to an actual concrete goal, rather than just exist for the sake of having a habit.
An important component of having a goal tied to a habit is that it allows you to size your habit proportionally to the goal.
Excitement is enough to get you through the first week or two of a new habit, but is fundamentally unable to sustain you beyond that. To go further, you need real motivation.
Failing to understand and validate your motivation up front leads you to the possibility of entering a cycle of pushing hard on a new habit for a couple weeks, losing interest, feeling bad for giving up, and then being slightly more reluctant and pessimistic towards future habits. This pattern must be avoided.
all. A downward spiral of failing to adopt habits is harmful in the long term, and the time spent on a habit that never had a chance could have been better spent on a properly motivated habit that would have been successful.
Whenever you feel like you may not have proper motivation for a habit, pick a new one and revisit the discarded habit later
The very first tangible step in creating a new habit is understanding exactly why you're drawn to it. The skill of being brutally honest with oneself is critical at this stage.
Ask yourself whether, under duress and the pressures and chaos of the real world, your motivation will still be strong a month from now and a year from now. If the answer is no, do not start the habit, or at least scale the habit back in intensity.
be honest with yourself and size your habit accordingly. In most areas of life, it's better to try and to fail than to not try at all. In establishing habits, it's far better to succeed at an easier habit and then build up from there.
On a piece of paper, write down these four sections:   1. What good things will happen if I implement this habit? 2. What bad things will happen if I implement this habit? 3. What good things will happen if I don't implement this habit? 4. What bad things will happen if I don't implement this habit?   For any given habit, you should be able to think of several things for each category. Those in sections 1 and 4 will be motivating, but 2 and 3 will be demotivating. You might be tempted to only list the motivating ones, but this will backfire because you will no longer trust your list. So write things in every section. When you see that the positives outweigh the negatives, you will have an honest and sober assessment of your options and a clear winner.   Keep in mind that one significant positive thing might counteract several smaller negative ones. It's important to read over the list carefully and visualize each outcome to feel its impact. Which do you want the most? Which are you the most afraid of?   Allowing your mind to really go through each item and imagine what life would be like under each circumstance, implementing the habit or not, creates a visceral drive to adopt the habit.   To make sure that this motivation sticks, write yourself a note explaining why you're going to implement the habit.
NOTE: Finding motivation
You'll get the greatest compliance by maximizing frequency and minimizing intensity. Daily habits are hard to overlook or miss, and low intensity habits are easy to complete. This combination greatly increases your chances of sticking with a habit.
Start small, become consistent, and increase at a manageable pace. That's how you optimize for the finish line, rather than the starting line.
Whether for small or big habits, bias yourself strongly towards habits which require daily execution.
Prime candidates for automation tend to be these sorts of habits, those that are less about personal change and more about things that just “have to be done” on a regular basis. Saving a minute or two here and there isn't a big deal, but the cumulative benefit of removing things from that mental todo list is big. It's the difference between constant distraction, wondering if there's something critical that needs to be done, and having a clear mind for whatever tasks and habits you have each day.
Humans are creatures of routine, and altering that routine takes significantly more willpower and effort than simply maintaining it. For that reason, you'll often want to have one very strict habit for loading, and then another to maintain. Put in the effort up front and then make it easy.
The purpose of the loading habit is to completely remove all associations with your old habit.
You start small, build up to your loading habit, keep at it until you believe that your new behavior is fixed in place, and then switch to maintenance.
This two-phase habit system also makes adherence easier. Disrupting entrenched habits requires a period of hardcore adherence, but knowing that it won't last forever helps you to mentally get through the most difficult times.
although the effort to build the first simple habit may not be worth it in isolation, it is worth it when you add in the benefit of the next habit being slightly easier to build, and the next one afterwards even easier than that.
To get the most out of the habit-building process, pay close attention to where you have the most difficulty.
When you notice patterns in where you fall short, exercise brutal honesty and account for your weakness in the future.
Whenever you begin a new habit, you should think about what its trigger is going to be, and to commit to that.
The hidden benefit is that you can only have one action most-strongly linked to any given trigger, so this is also a good way to get rid of bad habits.
From this soup of unknown habits and triggers we are able to consciously rewire ourselves to make excellent subconscious choices which move us closer to our goals. Because we're using existing triggers and are designing manageable habits, this huge improvement can be made with relatively little ongoing effort and drain on willpower. We're not adding more triggers to our days, we're just changing the actions they spur.
You can also use habits as triggers for other habits, thus creating a reliable chain.
Unless the order actually matters, the easiest habits should be loaded up front, and the most difficult ones should be last. This ensures that you maximize the benefit of momentum as you move through your chain.
When appropriate, sacrifice your maintenance habits in favor of keeping up your loading habits.
Maintenance habits will very quickly slip back into place on the chain when you're able to return to it, but I've found loading habits to feel like big impositions and sometimes completely fall off.
Chains are a powerful tool to make organizing series of habits effortless, but it's important to remember that the links of the chain are more important than the chain itself. Don't allow a break in the chain to ruin all if its components.
When asking a friend to hold you accountable, make it concrete and easy for him. It must be concrete, because you don't want to impose on him to constantly evaluate your progress.
there must be consequences for failure. The primary purpose of having consequences is that they make the agreement official and definite.
Reserve accountability for only the most difficult and important of your habits. It increases compliance, but at the cost of coordinating (albeit minimally) with someone else. It's also a missed opportunity to build the habit of self-reliance, so use it only when there's serious concern that you may not stick with the habit without it.
If we fail to direct attention to input, we can still improve significantly, but have only limited avenues for growth. Maximum growth comes when we allow ourselves to consider high-quality influence, contemplate it, and use it to direct habits and action.
only quit habits when you no longer want to quit them. This is the only mindset under which we can make difficult decisions and not be influenced by our pesky lazy brain.
The greatest benefits of quitting were short-term, which is a sure sign of a mistake. I had emotional firsthand experience with the downsides of working out, but hadn't waited long enough to enjoy the benefits.
One of the biggest pitfalls in habit-building is quitting at the worst possible time, accruing the fewest benefits for the most effort, while evaluating the situation from the cloudiest perspective. Wait until you have loaded the habit, like it, and can think clearly.
Just as building positive habits creates a meta-benefit of becoming better at creating habits, certain negative habits will reach beyond their own scope and interfere negatively with other habits.
If you have these habits, attack them first by finding their triggers and reprogramming them with new positive habits.
To build good habits, you must be able to focus on the process of what you're doing, both for personal satisfaction, and as a mechanism for improving your habits. An addiction to stimulation makes that impossible, and traps you in a cycle of web browsing, channel surfing, or simply focus-shifting.
If friends discourage the new habits you're building, it's your responsibility to deduce the root cause of their discouragement. Is it because they have domain knowledge of the changes you're trying to make and have legitimate concerns, or is it a product of insecurity?
Use the impulse to seek stimulation as a trigger for a habit of taking a moment to think about what you should actually be doing with your time.
Given the same level of willpower and motivation, having the right environment decreases slip-ups and reduces the stress of building habits.
Simplicity and freedom from distraction are the core components of the habit builder's habitat.
In particular, you want to eliminate the type of distractions that force you to use willpower.
Most of your focus should be directly on the habits you're trying to build. There's no better angle to hit a nail than head-on.
The only time it's likely to be helpful to suggest a habit to a friend is when he asks for help or advice on a problem you've solved through habits.

Positivity Habits
Outlook is influenced by external events, but is by definition your reaction to those events. By creating positive habits around how you react to external events, you improve your outlook.

Positivity Towards Yourself
Becoming positive is a one-habit job that takes one to three months. You will notice a difference after one month, but it will have built so gradually that you may discount it's effectiveness.
every time you have any negative thought, simply think of one positive aspect of the situation. The positive aspect doesn't have to be equal in magnitude to the negative aspects, it just has to exist.
There's no need to dwell on the positive, use it to rationalize the negative, or anything like that. Just search for it, find it, and move on.

Positivity Towards Others
In the face of that uncertainty of never truly knowing whether one is right or wrong, the best we can do is to have compassion towards the other person and acknowledge the paradox of being certain in our position yet aware that our strong convictions are sometimes wrong.
Whether other people are doing smart things, dumb things, things that help us, or things that harm us, both parties can be best served through fostering compassion and minimizing focus on how wrong the other is.
Whenever you find yourself thinking poorly of someone or in some sort of conflict with someone, force yourself to say to yourself, “Remember that this person is just doing their best and trying to be happy, just like me.”

Health Habits
habits which will improve your life expectancy, average well-being, as well as your ability to use your physical and mental facilities to their maximum.

Eating Healthy Food
eating healthy food encourages an upward spiral of taking good care of oneself, feeling better because of it, and, as a result, being motivated to build other positive habits.
there are a few key dietary components that are universally, or near-universally, agreed to be significant. Rather than get caught of in the dogma of any specific “named diet”, it's better to focus on the few things that matter most.
Sugar and highly-refined grains are the most significantly unhealthy things in the standard diet. Eliminating those two groups of foods is about eighty percent of getting to a healthy diet.
simple processed carbohydrates are physically and mentally addictive. It is best to quit cold turkey. The first year is difficult, but then it becomes very easy. By then, you will have completely weaned yourself off of them, you will find them to be too sweet and unpleasant, and your honest preference will be for healthier foods. That's how you build a long-term healthy diet.
The goal isn't to have a perfect diet in every way, but to eliminate the dozen or so foods that do the most damage, and to enjoy your diet enough to make it sustainable.
Once you enter the maintenance phase, you can allow yourself to eat unhealthy food under certain circumstances.
plan every one of your meals in advance. This is challenging to do, but the effort virtually guarantees success.

Good Sleep
The goal with good sleep is to get as much sleep as your body wants, probably around 8 hours on average, and to wake up without an alarm clock.
A long-term view is critical when attacking the sleep habit. In any given week, you can sacrifice your sleep for more time spent working, and possibly even more high-quality output. But over the long term, you'll find that the quantity of quality output you are able to produce will be directly correlated to how closely you are able to follow your body's natural sleep patterns.
The first step towards a good sleep habit is creating a good sleep environment. The key components of a good sleep environment are complete darkness and silence.
Rather than regulate your wake up time, regulate your bedtime. This will give your body the consistency to build a sleep schedule that is optimal for you.
In addition to your bedtime, set a strict screens-off time one or two hours prior to your bedtime. This is a great time to do some daily reading.
The optimal sleep temperature is around sixty-five degrees.

Meditation
excellent book, the Willpower Instinct, which said that the two best practices for increasing willpower were working out and meditating every day.
If you meditate for five minutes a day, you will notice results within two months.
Every day, just sit for five minutes in a quiet space, close your eyes, and focus on your breath.
Your overriding goal is just to sit there for five minutes. Any time you do that, you have successfully meditated. When you notice that your mind starts thinking about something else, refocus on your breath.
meditation were easy, I learned, it would not be as beneficial.
If you focus on the outcome of executing a perfect meditation session without your mind wandering once, you will get frustrated and want to quit. As always, focus on the process and count it as a win any time you sit with your eyes closed, trying your best, for five minutes.
Having this ability has helped me become more aware of triggers for distraction and has helped me stop being such a slave to subconscious impulses.   I also believe that it has helped me be satisfied and relaxed in otherwise annoying situations

Drinking Tea Daily
Besides the potential health benefits, a daily pot of tea creates a nice space to reflect and plan, and gives a calm and enduring energy different than that obtained from coffee or soda.

Vitamin D
The majority of Americans are deficient in vitamin D, which is an important vitamin for everything from your immune system to the strength of your bones and muscles. If you work indoors and don't spend an obviously significant amount of time in the sun every day or two, you are almost certainly deficient.
Take 10,000iu per day until you are no longer deficient (or after 30 days if you don't get another test to check). Then drop down to 5,000iu.

Working Out
Work out three days a week, doing three exercises each day. Monday is deadlifts, pullups, and rows. Wednesday is bench press, incline bench press, and curls. Friday is squat or leg press, straight-leg deadlift, and cable crunches. Deadlifts of both varieties are two sets of 4-6 reps, pullups are three sets of 4-6, everything else is three sets of 8-12.
After a couple warmup sets of 50% and 75% of your maximum weight, do your maximum. Then drop the weight by ten percent and do the same number of reps as before, plus one. If you have a third set, drop by another ten percent and increase by one more rep. For pullups, if you can do at least 4 with just your body weight, you add weight to the first one.
If you hit the maximum in the range the previous week, you increase the weight by five or ten pounds and reset to the bottom of the range. So if you bench pressed 100 at twelve reps last week, do 110 at eight this week.
This is a general formula that will get good results for anyone. You can customize it and pair it with an effective diet to get even more out of your time.
Shifting your diet to 30-40% protein, including a shake one hour before working out, will help. If you want to gain or lose weight, you need to count your calories carefully and then increase or decrease by about five-hundred calories per day to gain or lose, respectively.

Expansion Habits
Ideas don't exist in a vacuum, so whatever outside influences we're exposed to become a part of our creation process and affect our output.   For this reason, it's worth some time optimizing our input through habits, as well as our output.

Traveling to Unusual Countries
There is a difference between going on a vacation and traveling. One is an escape from reality, and the other is a means to connect more deeply with it.
Without traveling we limit our view of the world to a rather narrow one. Creative excellence can come from such a narrow view, but not as easily is it can come from worldly experience and understanding.
Make a goal of a certain number of new places to visit per year, block out the time for it way in advance, and book at least one part of the trip early enough to commit to it.
When choosing the places to go, choose places that are radically different from those with which you're familiar.
If you're on a tight budget, just pick places that are closer to you. Even if you're just taking a road trip a couple states over, you're building the habit that will expand as you become able to travel to more places.
I call traveling a habit because I've noticed that those who do it regularly get more out of it, go to more adventurous places, and continue as they get older.
There is also a lot of value in going back to places you've already visited, rather than constantly going to new places.

Writing Daily
it has made me a clearer and more precise thinker and communicator.
Write a prescribed amount every day. I find it easiest to assign myself to write a single blog post every day, but you could also choose a word count.
NOTE: Anything above 300 words per day is good
You can also set a fixed amount of time. Half an hour of writing per day would be enough.
What you write about is not important. Neither is the quality of the writing. Constraining yourself to a topic or expecting a certain quality level will make the habit more difficult. Success is achieved if you sit down and write for the prescribed amount of time or number of words.
At first your writing might be horrible and you might find it difficult to articulate your thoughts. That's completely fine− it just means that you'll benefit even more from the habit.
You'll get additional benefit from your habit if you post it to a blog. My habit is to write every day of the week and then post the best two to my blog.
If you're really stuck and want to break the habit, just write about how you're really stuck and want to break the habit.
The real value is that it forces you to be thorough about evaluating thoughts, helps synthesize input into output, and transforms you into a clearer communicator.

Seek Out Masterpieces
Once per week, two weeks, or month, make the time to go see masterpieces. A masterpiece is anything made or performed by someone who is an expert in their craft. Obvious choices are art museums, symphony performances, and operas, but I'd extend the category to include stuff like factory tours of impressive companies.
appreciating art doesn't require tons of knowledge or preparation. Just going to a museum, walking around for a couple hours and stopping if and when you find something that's interesting to you, is plenty.

Pushing Your Comfort Zone
Our brains are lazy and we're creatures of habit. That means that without conscious effort, we will only do what is comfortable and familiar.
By making desirable behaviors comfortable and familiar, we can change them from being cumbersome and mentally taxing to comfortable and easy.
Everyone faces fear when pushing out of their comfort zone, but fear alone is not a good reason to avoid doing something. In fact, those times when we are able to confront fear and push ourselves are often the times where we make breakthroughs in life.
This habit works best with the specific trigger of thinking, “I'd like to do _____, but I'm too scared/nervous”. For it to properly work, you must be able to be honest with yourself,
Many people will convince themselves that they're not actually scared, they're just busy or not really interested, and will give themselves a pass.
Whenever you have that feeling of wanting to do something, but being too nervous, you should immediately think, “Okay, now I have to do it.”
The success is in the process of expanding your comfort zone.
When loading this habit, you should do it every single time you have the impulse not to. Only by doing that will you be able to expand your comfort zone when it's really difficult to do so.
Over time, though, it's fair to think a bit more about why you want to do something, and make the judgment call if you should expand your comfort zone or not.
This habit does not mean to follow every impulse you have, of course. There's a good reason that humans have impulse control. The best examples of cases where this habit comes into play are positive interactions with strangers and trying out new activities.

Organization Habits

Daily Imperfect Cleaning
acknowledge that keeping your space perfectly clean is not worth the effort to you. Unless that changes, which is unlikely unless you're already executing on it, you will never keep your place perfectly clean all the time.
if you can set a lower standard for acceptable cleanliness, cleaning becomes a lot easier, and a lot of the pressure is relieved.
Every day, you will clean your house to a “nine out of ten” standard twice. Choose specific triggers that happen every day at home, and use them to trigger the habit.
you'll be very surprised at just how quickly you can clean your house to this standard. Once you mentally accept how quick it is, it will be very easy to stick to the habit.
When choosing your cleaning times, make sure that you will not be tired or pressed for time when they occur.
Clearly define what your standard means.
It's important to be able to determine accurately whether you're done or not, otherwise the task can drag on into perfectionism and become too much of a burden to do twice a day.

Keeping a Useful Calendar
If you can't rely on your calendar, then there's no point in actually keeping one, because it's taking up time and not relieving you of the mental load of having to keep track of things.
the critical component of a useful calendar system is making sure that every single thing gets put on it. Only once you reach that state will having a calendar be more of a benefit than a burden.
The key with a calendar, like emails, is focusing only on the first step and aiming for perfect adherence. Whenever you commit to do anything on any date, or are given a date that will be useful to you in the future, put it on your calendar on your phone.
When in doubt on whether or not you'll need a date in the future, put it down.

Getting Rid of Stuff
The essential habit of becoming a minimalist is the habit of regularly evaluating how your possessions either add to or detract from the conscious life you're living and then getting rid of those things that are burdensome.
All around your house or apartment, you have stuff that you no longer use. The key to making this habit work is to understand that all of that stuff has negative value. Storing stuff that you won't actually use is worse than not having it at all. This is because it is a distraction, is depreciating, and may require maintenance, organization, and cost to store.
It's also important to understand that the true value of stuff is a combination of its utility to you and the present day amount that you can sell it for. The original price you paid, or the utility that you would get out of it in ideal (and unrealistic) conditions, is wholly irrelevant.
The getting rid of stuff habit should be triggered any time you see something that you haven't used in six to twelve months. When that happens, you should ask yourself whether you can get rid of it or not. If you're at least ninety percent sure that you could get rid of it, just do it.
Choose a spot in your house to move everything that you've decided to get rid of.
Whenever that pile gets big enough, get rid of everything in one big batch.
You can make your life a lot easier by pricing things just a little bit on the low side. Remember that the goal isn't to become a professional used goods salesperson, it's to unclutter your life.
When you have the habit of periodically getting rid of things you aren't using anymore, your brain begins to create links between the beginning (buying) and the end (selling) of all of your stuff.
This awareness of the full cycle will naturally make you a more value-conscious shopper, steering you away from items that are high price, low utility, and low lifetime value.

Social Habits
like everything, the way you interact with people is largely based on a set of habits. By changing just a few of those habits, you can be a better friend, colleague, or family member.

Always Be On Time
You might think that by always being the person who is on time you end up waiting around for people. This is true in the short term, but in the longer term everyone around you tends to be more on time, so there's less time wasted sitting around and waiting on both sides.
The bulk of success with this habit is building the proper motivation, and elevating timeliness from a nice bonus to an absolute imperative.
The trick to always being on time is to show up everywhere five minutes early and wait around the corner until the exact right time.
The five-minute buffer allows for a bit of bad estimation, traffic, parking, or other minutiae that people don't account for. Once you're maintaining the habit, you can cut that buffer down for routes you know really well.

Delete or Contact
Once a month, scroll through your entire phone book. For each person you haven't contacted in the past month, or since the last check, force yourself to either delete them from your phone or send them a message or make a call.

Productivity Habits
It's important to think of your job or your work primarily as a system of habits. Having a defined system allows you to pinpoint what's working and what isn't, and to iteratively improve it over time.
The interesting effect of building productivity habits is that because so much of your output is defined by your habits, you'll have a major advantage in anything you do.

Twice, Then Quit
This realistic view may not be as productive short-term as just burning ourselves out, but it does lead to higher long-term productivity, which should always be the time horizon upon which we grade ourselves.
Twice, then Quit is very simple. When you want to quit working for the first time, don't. Push through and work some more. The second time you want to quit, also don't quit. Push through again. The third time you want to quit, go ahead and quit.
When you push through twice but still want to quit, you can be confident that you gave it a solid effort and that you need a little bit of time off before tackling the problem again. That lack of ambiguity erases unnecessary guilt.
The trigger for twice, then quit, should be feeling exhausted, being unable to focus on the work at hand, or feeling like you're not able to muster the effort towards creating high-quality work.

Eliminate Starting Procrastination
Think about the top thing that you want to get done every single day. It may not be the most important thing that will get done the whole day, but it should be the most important recurring daily task that you have.
Then, every day, track what time you started that activity.
what it's actually doing is training your subconscious to recognize when you start that task, and to value starting early.

Plan When Stuck
Another leading cause of procrastination is simply not knowing what to do next.
The surest sign that this is what's stopping you is when you ask yourself whether or not you know specifically what you should be doing next, and you can't quite put your finger on it.
This habit is triggered by procrastinating, asking yourself if you know exactly what you should be doing next, and failing to come up with a definite answer. Whenever that happens, simply set a clock for thirty minutes, and begin planning.
useful work won't get done unless you have a clear path for it.
The goal isn't to figure out the one true path to success, but rather to understand what you're up against. It's this context that allows you to look at your immediate todo items and choose the best, or one of the best, to attack next.
The habit is intended to help you get out of the weeds and get perspective on your situation to stimulate progress again.

Rating Your Day
rating each day made my days better.
Every night, before you go to bed, rate your day on a scale from one to ten.
Don't worry about having a consistent scale. Inevitably, your standards will shift as you're increasingly able to use your time efficiently.
All of this helps put a slump into context and motivate you to grind your way out, rather than feel helpless.

Putting it All Together
At its core, though, the practice of building habits is simple. We identify things that we do each day and we adjust them to make them a little bit better. We put our faith in the compounded power of small repeated actions, and we adjust our behavior to reap those benefits.
Starting with humble habits is the best way to make sure you are on that path.
