How Music Works
David Byrne

PREFACE
You can’t touch music—it exists only at the moment it is being apprehended—and yet it can profoundly alter how we view the world and our place in it.
How music works, or doesn’t work, is determined not just by what it is in isolation (if such a condition can ever be said to exist) but in large part by what surrounds it, where you hear it, and when you hear it. How it’s performed, how it’s sold and distributed, how it’s recorded, who performs it, whom you hear it with, and, of course, finally, what it sounds like: these are the things that determine not only if a piece of music works—if it successfully achieves what it sets out to accomplish—but what it is.
Does asking oneself these questions in an attempt to see how the machine works spoil the enjoyment? It hasn’t for me. Music isn’t fragile. Knowing how the body works doesn’t take away from the pleasure of living. Music has been around as long as people have formed communities. It’s not going to go away, but its uses and meaning evolve.

CHAPTER ONE   Creation in Reverse
context largely determines what is written, painted, sculpted, sung, or performed. That doesn’t sound like much of an insight, but it’s actually the opposite of conventional wisdom, which maintains that creation emerges out of some interior emotion, from an upwelling of passion or feeling, and that the creative urge will brook no accommodation, that it simply must find an outlet to be heard, read, or seen.
I believe that we unconsciously and instinctively make work to fit preexisting formats.
Just because the form that one’s work will take is predetermined and opportunistic (meaning one makes something because the opportunity is there), it doesn’t mean that creation must be cold, mechanical, and heartless.
In a sense, we work backward, either consciously or unconsciously, creating work that fits the venue available to us.
Presuming that there is such a thing as “progress” when it comes to music, and that music is “better” now than it used to be, is typical of the high self-regard of those who live in the present. It is a myth. Creativity doesn’t “improve.”
NOTE: Seems a controversial take. Need to understand why "improve" is in quotes
sometimes the most prestigious place doesn’t always work out best for your music. This acoustic barrier could be viewed as a subtle conspiracy, a sonic wall, a way of keeping the riffraff out
The musicians learned to stretch out and extend whatever section of the tune was deemed popular. These improvisations and elongations evolved out of necessity, and a new kind of music came into being.
NOTE: Re Jazz solos
Until amplification and microphones came into common use, the instruments written for and played were adapted to fit the situation. The makeup of the bands, as well as the parts the composers wrote, evolved to be heard.
Technology had turned the living room or any small bar with a jukebox into a concert hallP—and often there was dancing. Besides changing the acoustic context, recorded music also allowed music venues to come into existence without stages and often without any live musicians at all.
The music those bands ended up writing in response—arena rock—is written with that in mind: rousing, stately anthems. To my ears it’s a soundtrack for a gathering, and listening to it in other contexts re-creates the memory or anticipation of that gathering—a stadium in your head.
The joy of making music will find a way, regardless of the context and the form that emerges to best fit it. The musician David Rothenberg claims that “life is far more interesting than it needs to be, because the forces that guide it are not merely practical.”
What’s interesting to me is not that these practical adaptations happen (in retrospect that seems predictable and obvious), but what it means for our perception of creativity.
Genius—the emergence of a truly remarkable and memorable work—seems to appear when a thing is perfectly suited to its context. When something works, it strikes us as not just being a clever adaptation, but as emotionally resonant as well. When the right thing is in the right place, we are moved.
We do express our emotions, our reactions to events, breakups, and infatuations, but the way we do that—the art of it—is in putting them into prescribed forms or squeezing them into new forms that perfectly fit some emerging context. That’s part of the creative process, and we do it instinctively; we internalize it, like birds do.
It seems the effect of architecture on music and sound can be reciprocal. Just as acoustics in a space determine the evolution of music, acoustic properties—particularly those that affect the human voice—can guide the structure and form of buildings.


CHAPTER TWO   My Life in Performance
The process of writing music doesn’t follow a strict path.
I guess that like many others, I decided that making my art in public (even if that meant playing other people’s songs at that point) was a way of reaching out and communicating when ordinary chitchat was not comfortable for me. It seemed not only a way to “speak” in another language, but also a means of entry into conversation—other musicians and even girls (!) would talk to someone who had just been onstage.
one does not have to be nuts to be creative. Maybe some problem of some sort can at least get the ball in play. But I have come to believe that you can escape your demons and still tap the well.
I also realized then that it was possible to mix ironic humor with sincerity in performance. Seeming opposites could coexist. Keeping these two in balance was a bit of a tightrope act, but it could be done.
I could see that innovation wasn’t always appreciated and that audiences could be nasty.
We’ve all spent time imagining ourselves inhabiting the bodies of our childhood heroes, like avatars in a way, and it’s thrilling, but at some point it’s time to put those urges to rest. After all, those bodies are already being used by their original owners.
NOTE: 1. It's always better to be yourself than someone you're not2. Learn new things but play to your strengths
The range of preexisting performative models from which to draw on was overwhelming—and artistically invalid, as I’ve argued, because those tropes were already taken. So the only sensible course was to avoid all of it, to strip everything back and see what was left.
NOTE: An exercise in dscovering your originality
It was mathematics; when you subtract all that unwanted stuff from something, art or music, what do you have left? Who knows? With the objectionable bits removed, does it then become more “real”? More honest? I don’t think so anymore. I eventually realized that the simple act of getting on stage is in itself artificial, but the dogma provided a place to start. We could at least pretend we had jettisoned our baggage (or other people’s baggage, as we imagined it) and would therefore be forced to come up with something new. It wasn’t entirely crazy.
I soon realized that when it comes to clothing it is next to impossible to find something completely neutral. Every outfit carries cultural baggage of some kind.
It turns out that not being perfectly aligned with a grid is okay; in fact, sometimes it feels better than a perfectly metric fixed-up version. When Willie Nelson or George Jones sings way off the beat, it somehow increases the sense that they’re telling you the story, conveying it to you, one person to another. The lurches and hesitations are internalized through performance, and after a while everyone knows when they’ll happen. The performers don’t have to think about them, and at some point that becomes part of the band’s sound. Those agreed-upon imperfections are what give a performance character, and eventually the listener recognizes that it’s the very thing that makes a band or singer distinctive.
Audiences love it when a performer walks the tightrope in front of them; like sports fans, they feel like their support is what keeps the team winning.
The band became a more abstract entity, a community. And while individual band members might shine and take virtuosic turns, their identities became submerged within the group. It might seem paradoxical, but the more integral everyone was, the more everyone gave up some individuality and surrendered to the music. It was a living, breathing model of a more ideal society, an ephemeral utopia that everyone, even the audience, felt was being manifested in front of them, if only for a brief period.
by and large the world of music in the United States is only slightly less segregated than other institutions. A lot of businesses might not be overtly racist, but by playing to their perceived demographic—which is a natural business decision—they reinforce existing divisions. Change does happen, but sometimes it’s frustratingly slow.
The Western emphasis on pseudo-naturalism and the cult of spontaneity as a kind of authenticity was only one way of doing things onstage. I decided that maybe it was okay to wear costumes and put on a show. It didn’t imply insincerity at all; in fact, this kind of practiced performance was all around, if one only looked at it.
The magician would show how the trick was done and then do the trick, and my belief was that this transparency wouldn’t lessen the magic.
The audience loves to hear songs they’ve heard before, and though they are most familiar with the recorded versions, they appreciate hearing what they already know in a new context. They don’t want an immaculate reproduction of the record, they want it skewed in some way. They want to see something familiar from a new angle.
Isn’t music the “content” that should be guiding all this stage business? Well, it seems the juxtaposition of music and image guides our minds and hearts so that, in the end, which came first doesn’t matter as much as one might think.
We sometimes think we discern cause and effect simply because things are taking place at the same moment in time, and this extends beyond the stage. We read into things, find emotional links between what we see and hear, and to me, these connections are no less true and honest for not being conceived and developed ahead of time.
One forgets that part of one’s performance is one’s history—or sometimes the lack of it. You’re playing against what an audience knows, what they expect. This seems to be true of all performers; there’s baggage that gets carried into the venue that we can’t see.
Money and budgets are as much a determining factor in music and performance as anything else, but that’s for another chapter.
The way one sees things, and the expectations one brings to a performance, or any art form, really, is completely determined by the venue.
NOTE: Venue not necessarily a physical space, more a delivery context
It’s not as if one can shift music, visual art, dance, or spoken word like pieces in a Tetris game until each art form plops into its perfect place, but it does give one the idea that some juggling of contexts might not hurt either.
There’s something special about the communal nature of an audience at a live performance, the shared experience with other bodies in a room going through the same thing at the same time, that isn’t analogous to music heard through headphones.
As a singer, you can be transparent and reveal yourself onstage, in that moment, and at the same time be the person whose story is being told in the song. Not too many other kinds of performance allow that.


CHAPTER THREE   Technology Shapes Music
Part One: Analog
Just as photography changed the way we see, recording technology changed the way we hear. Before recorded music became ubiquitous, music was, for most people, something we did.
A host of factors contribute to making the experience of live music a far from objective phenomenon.
Music did not get more compositionally sophisticated when it started being recorded, but I would argue that it did get texturally more complex. Perhaps written literature changed, too, as it became widespread—maybe it too evolved to be more textural (more about mood, technical virtuosity, and intellectual complexity than merely about telling a story).
Odd how technology and inventions come into being and fail to flourish for all sorts of reasons that have nothing to do with the skill, materials, or technology available at the time. Technological progress, if one can call it that, is full of dead ends and cul-de-sacs—roads not taken that could have led to who knows what alternate history. Or maybe the meandering paths, with their secret trajectories, would eventually and inevitably converge, and we’d all end up exactly where we are.
Things might impinge on our senses but still fail to register in the brain. Our internal filters are far more powerful than we might like to think.
NOTE: Sounds, images, etc
So the mind’s eye (and ear) is a truly variable thing. What one person hears and sees is not necessarily what another perceives. Our own sensory organs, and thus even our interpretations of data and our readings of measurements on instruments, are wildly subjective.
Should a recording endeavor to render reality as faithfully as possible, with no additions, coloration, or interference? Or do the inherent sonic biases and innate qualities of recording comprise an art unto itself?
Our understanding of certain kinds of music, based on recordings anyway, is completely inaccurate.
The elusive quest for “capturing” reality never dies.
Some creative urges seem truly innate and will find a means of expression, a way out, no matter if traditional means are denied to us.
But by listening with one’s eyes closed, or to a recording, one could discern the deep feeling in what might have previously seemed a soulless performance. Of course, the sound itself didn’t change, but our perception of it did—by not seeing, we could hear in a different way.
What has happened is to some extent what Sousa feared: we now think of the sound of recordings when we think of a song or piece of music, and the live performance of that same piece is now considered an interpretation of the recorded version. What was originally a simulation of a performance—the recording—has supplanted performances, and performances are now considered the simulation. It seemed to some that the animating principle of music was being replaced by a more perfect, but slightly less soulful, machine.
In performance, sound comes from an infinite number of points—even if the performer is in front of you, the sound is bouncing off walls and ceilings, and that’s part of the experience. It might not make the performance “better” in a technical sense, but it is absolutely more enveloping.
History and culture can’t really be preserved by technology alone.
Inevitably, recorded music was a branch of proto-globalization—a process that could uncover hidden gems while at the same time flattening them out.
Perhaps this is a case where the technology and the circumstances of its wide acceptance conveniently happened to fit a preexisting form like a glove, and that would explain why the technology became so popular. Everyone instinctively knew exactly what to do with it and how to make it part of their lives.
NOTE: Re: song length of 3.5 minutes. But interesting in a marketing/growth capitalization sense
Music tells us things—social things, psychological things, physical things about how we feel and perceive our bodies—in a way that other art forms can’t. It’s sometimes in the words, but just as often the content comes from a combination of sounds, rhythms, and vocal textures that communicate, as has been said by others, in ways that bypass the reasoning centers of the brain and go straight to our emotions.
Music, and I’m not even talking about the lyrics here, tells us how other people view the world—people we have never met, sometimes people who are no longer alive—and it tells it in a non-descriptive way. Music embodies the way those people think and feel: we enter into new worlds—their worlds—and though our perception of those worlds might not be 100 percent accurate, encountering them can be completely transformative.
Instead of global hegemony and standardization, sound in films allowed hundreds of cultures to find their own cinematic voices.
NOTE: You can't control how a tool is used, especially how it affects different cultures, and that's probably a good thing
The use of editing and splicing meant that a “recording” no longer necessarily represented a single performance, or at least it didn’t have to.
The elements of a “performance” no longer had to be rooted in contiguous time or space.
if the goal of your performance is perfection, then maybe that’s better achieved in the studio, with the help of tape editing and splicing.
there are psychoacoustic tricks that both musicians and record producers began to employ that could fool the ear into thinking a song was louder than the one that had preceded it.
Instruments that play in the same pitch range compete with one another to be heard, so it is generally better to assign different frequency levels to each part if you want them to stand out. If everyone plays parts in the low end of their pitch range there’s a good chance everything will end up fairly muddled and indistinct, but if they spread the wealth, then the individual parts will appear more distinct and the whole thing will appear to be louder.
Quality was sliding down a slippery slope, but the freedom and empowerment that was enabled by the technology made up for it.
There is always a trade-off. As music gets disseminated and distinct regional voices find a way to be more widely heard, certain bands and singers (who might be more creative, or possibly have just been marketed by a bigger company) begin to dominate, and peculiar regional styles—what writer Greil Marcus, echoing Harry Smith, called the “old weird America”—eventually end up getting squashed, neglected, abandoned, and often forgotten. This dissemination/homogenization process runs in all directions simultaneously; it’s not just top-down repression of individuality and peculiarity.
Low frequencies are felt as much as they are heard. We feel that bass in our chest and gut; the music physically moves our bodies. Beyond any audible and neurological apprehension of music, in the disco environment it was pummeling and massaging us physically. These frequencies are sensuous, sexy, and also a little dirty and dangerous.
Music eats its young and gives birth to a new hybrid creature.


CHAPTER FOUR   Technology Shapes Music
Part Two: Digital
much of what we hear is partly defined and limited by the mechanics of our ears.
But there are things we “hear” that have nothing to do with the physics of the eardrum and the auditory canal.
We have the ability to selectively hear just the stuff we’re interested in and make the rest recede into some distant acoustic background. We also have the ability to perceive patterns in sounds.
The digitization of every form of media enabled the Web to be what it is, much more than a way of transmitting text-based documents. This slicing of content allowed a wide variety of media to flow into that river, and in a way we owe all the pictures, sounds, songs, games, and movies that are part of our Internet experience to the phone company, information science, and psychoacoustics.
Unlike LPs, whose grooves and bouncing needles limited the volume, the low frequencies were practically unlimited with the super-high-end CD technology.
Throughout the history of recorded music, we have tended to value convenience over quality every time.
The spectrum of sound on analog mediums has an infinite number of gradations, whereas in the digital world everything is sliced into a finite number of slivers. Slivers and bits might fool the ear into believing that they represent a continuous audio spectrum (psychoacoustics at work), but by nature they are still ones and zeros, steps rather than a smooth slope.
By letting the listener or viewer fill in the blanks, complete the picture (or piece of music), the work becomes personalized and the audience can adapt it to their own lives and situations. They become more involved with the work, and an intimacy and involvement becomes possible that perfection might have kept at bay.
sense that the music breathes a little more as a result of me not always bending to what the software makes easiest.
If a listener can predict where a piece of music is going, he begins to tune out. Shifting off an established pattern keeps things interesting and engaging for everyone, though it sometimes means you have to avoid the path of least resistance that digital recording software often offers.
Song references are like emotional shortcuts and social acronyms.
I will admit that there is an inevitable excitement ceiling when it comes to these karaoke spectaculars, at least as far as the music goes, since there is never the possibility of the music rising beyond its preexisting programmed level (and I don’t mean volume). But if the social and the visual elements are good enough—and using this technology they are freer to become so—then it can be a reasonable trade-off.
NOTE: Interesting point - using a backtrack instead of live instruments all but guarantees the absence of excitement from improvisation
Marketing and promotion aren’t very cost effective for one song at a time, so temporarily at least we still market and acquire songs in clumps (an hour or less is typical), as we have for decades. But there’s no reason that will remain the standard indefinitely.
Our musical landscape is indeed broadening, as length doesn’t matter anymore: short, long, and in between all coexist.
We carry our own soundtrack with us wherever we go, and the world around us is overlaid with our music. Our whole life becomes a movie, and we can alter the score for it over and over again: one minute it’s a tragedy and the next it’s an action film.
twentieth-century philosopher Theodor Adorno, ever the complainer, called this situation “accompanied solitude,” a situation where we might be alone, but we have the ability via music to create the illusion that we are not.
Private listening could be viewed as the height of narcissism—these devices usually exclude everyone else from the experience of enjoying music. In Brave New World, Aldous Huxley imagined a drug called soma that blissed everyone out. It was like taking a holiday, and you could regulate the length of the holiday by the dosage. Has technology turned music into a soma-like drug? Is it like a pill you take that is guaranteed to generate a desired emotion—bliss, anger, tranquility?
A slew of musical associations bounce around in our heads, linking to recurring memories and feelings that, after a while, facilitate the creation and reinforcement of specific neural pathways. These pathways help us make sense of those experiences. They make us who we are. Is that space now inhibited by the inundation of the music and sounds of others?
After more than a hundred years, we’re heading back to where we started. A century of technological innovation and the digitization of music has inadvertently had the effect of emphasizing its social function.
Music technology in some ways appears to have been on a trajectory in which the end result is that it will destroy and devalue itself. It will succeed completely when it self-destructs. The technology is useful and convenient, but it has, in the end, reduced its own value and increased the value of the things it has never been able to capture or reproduce.


CHAPTER FIVE   Infinite Choice: The Power of Curation
Endless choice is no choice. In an age of glut, when huge quantities of music are available, the issue for consumers is no longer access but how one finds music that is of interest.
Music tells people they’re not alone in their feelings, experiences, and thoughts. New ways of thinking are represented in the words, sounds, production, and rhythm. One absorbs these sonic metaphors unconsciously, and they encourage new avenues of thought in all aspects of one’s life. There’s serious value in music, but only if what is presented to us moves and excites us.
We lose something as a creative society when we become disengaged from the arts, when work is missed because there’s too much to deal with out there.
In the face of too many options, we often choose “none of the above.” We don’t actually want more, we want less. But less is useful only if what’s presented is personally meaningful. We want the illusion of free will, that some aspect of what we listen to is our choice.
there’s a lot of snobbism in culture, which means we don’t discover things we actually might enjoy.
Data may not lie, but how it’s parsed can vary.
Since data measures only the quantifiable, it would be easy to argue that much of what is valuable in the arts is hard to measure. We’re less special as individuals than we think, but we’re also social, emotional, unpredictable, and slippery. What we value in our lives is tough to reduce to numbers, though it’s true that numbers tell more than we care to admit.
the more we surrender access to our personal data, the more accurately uncanny the recommendations and production of content will become.
We love to assert our individuality, but increasingly we’re confronted with how predictable we are. There’s a tension there; we don’t want the illusion of choice taken away, but we desire the convenience that comes with that predictability.
The success of social recommendations depends on how the algorithms are programmed, and often that decision is made by humans whose goal is to maximize listenership. The proven way to do that is to give people what they want: content that pushes their buttons, that panders to them. It would seem that it would result in a race to the bottom.
The public votes with their clicks and shares, and in this dream narrative it can seem that anyone with talent can succeed. I’m not naïve enough to believe that music is a meritocracy, but there has been a power shift.
the removal of context allows a leveling of the playing field; maybe it’s easier to view something as contemporarily relevant if there’s no biography.
Deeper involvement with the artists and their influences can only make the experience stickier, as tech people say. The more extra-musical aspects that tag along, the more emotional weight accumulates.
It wouldn’t be all that hard to reintroduce extra-musical information. It takes up infinitesimal file space—but the discovery it facilitates is limitlessly buoying.
In a neurological analogy, we’re not our individual neurons, but the connections they’ve created between themselves based on our experiences. Music is the same: it’s not isolated bits of information, but about that essential connection that leads us to places we’ve never been before.


CHAPTER SIX   In the Recording Studio
whether music “works” or not has a lot to do with context.
Just as theater is an actor and writer’s medium, and cinema is a director’s medium, recorded music often came to be a producer’s medium, in which they could sometimes out-auteur the artists they were recording.
The true audio chaos of a place is evident in a recording. Though I use the word true, and though this might be what enters our ears, it’s not what we “hear” when our brains process that sound. As far as our brains are concerned, what is “true” is often wrong.
Our brains organize the sound we hear in the same way our eyes selectively see. Re-creating what something sounds like, what a sound or sonic environment feels like, in a music recording or a film, has become an art that some people are better at than others.
Friendship, common interests, and sensibilities seemed more important to us, especially based on our previous experience, than whatever technical skills or hit-making track record he might have possessed.
NOTE: Re: Brian Eno producing Talking Heads' second album
Do music-business finances, especially those dictated by recording technology, in some ways determine what music sounds like? Absolutely.
These factors make certain records sound the way they do; they are not purely the result of musically inspired directives. Financial strictures don’t determine a melody, the lyrics, or harmony, but they do affect how a record is recorded, and therefore what it ultimately sounds like.
The song, as it was released, was an arrangement of sounds that one would never have come up with in rehearsal or by sitting writing with a guitar. It could only have been created in a studio. As Eno observed at the time, the recording studio was now a compositional tool.
There were many musical universes out there, and we had been blinkered by confining ourselves to only one.
High fidelity, we realized, was a vastly overrated convention that no one had bothered to question.
The amazing thing was how easy it was (well, relatively), and how much the vocals felt like they had been performed or “sung” with the “band.” Part of this effect was, of course, entirely in the ear of the beholder—a phenomenon we noticed early on. The mind tends to find congruencies and links where none previously existed—not just in music, but in everything. More than just a way of tricking the mind, we also felt that, when successful, this effect also “tricked” the emotions.
Perhaps it’s wrong to say the emotions were being “tricked”; maybe these passionate voices and rhythms triggered emotional responses because our brains have neurological “receptors” awaiting musical and vocal combinations just like these, and we provided the necessary materials for that process to take place. Maybe that’s what artists do. A big major chord is a “trick” too.
Maybe the difference between speech and music isn’t all that great. We infer a lot from the tone of someone’s voice, so imagine that aspect of speech pushed just a little further.
It doesn’t matter whether or not something actually happened to the writer—or to the person interpreting the song. On the contrary, it is the music and the lyrics that trigger the emotions within us, rather than the other way around. We don’t make music—it makes us. Which is maybe the point of this whole book.
Granted, a writer has to draw on some instinctual understanding of a feeling in order to put something with some emotional truth down on paper, but it didn’t necessarily have to happen to them. In writing and performing music we are pushing our own buttons, and the surprising thing about My Life in the Bush of Ghosts is that vocals that we didn’t write ourselves—or, in the case of the found vocals, didn’t even sing—could still make us feel such a gamut of emotions.
Making music is like constructing a machine whose function is to dredge up emotions in performer and listener alike.
I’m beginning to think of the artist as someone who is adept at making devices that tap into our shared psychological makeup and that trigger the deeply moving parts we have in common. In that sense, the conventional idea of authorship is questionable. Not that I don’t want credit for the songs I’ve written, but what constitutes authorship is maybe not what we would like it to be.
Now it has become accepted that the author can be the curator, the guiding sensibility, rather than the singer.
Significantly, rhythm and texture are the two most difficult aspects of music to express in conventional Western musical notation. These qualities, some of the most resonant and important in contemporary popular music, and in some ways the most “African,” were excluded from, or maybe simply outside of, the system by which music was traditionally taught, passed on, notated, discussed, criticized, and—very important—copyrighted.
I began to notice, for example, that the choice of a hard consonant instead of a soft one implied something, something emotional. A consonant wasn’t merely a formal decision, it felt different. Vowels, too, had emotional resonances—a soft ooh and a pinched nasal aah have very different associations. I felt I had to adhere to whatever syllables seemed to fit the existing melody best, so I’d listen to the gibberish vocals respectfully and let those be my guide.
NOTE: Seems like a form of synaesthesia - one specifically lending to a musician
I was curious to see if I could gently break the routine of slipping into familiar song structures without things sounding “difficult.” Sometimes the usual verse-chorus verse-chorus-bridge pattern could seem a little predictable—and, as I’d learned, your attention can wander when you know what’s coming.
Home-studio recordings can now sound as good as the big-name studios’, and the lower-pressure (and less expensive) vibe in a home environment is often more conducive to creativity.
Sometimes the old ways work best.
NOTE: eg. Collaborating in person rather than electronically
What begins as a random walk often ends up taking you somewhere, somewhere that you later realize was exactly where you wanted to go.
NOTE: Re: song writing and the creative process. And also mundane daily tasks
It’s sad that just as it has gotten easier for anyone to make a record exactly in the way they envision, the traditional means of selling and distributing music are becoming less viable. Increasingly, recordings are the loss leaders for merchandise, live-performance tickets, and licensing opportunities. Recording, which used to be basically the most important thing one did as a professional musician, is increasingly just part of a larger package.
We soon might begin to view recordings as they were perceived when they came into being, as fixed versions of compositions—but not as the only or even the primary way the music is supposed to sound.


CHAPTER SEVEN   Collaborations
I discovered early on that collaborating is a vital part of music’s essence and an aid to creativity.
Sometimes this new thing is restricted by the players’ abilities and sensibilities, but rather than being a liability, these restrictions can actually be liberating.
Over time you internalize the tendencies and playing approaches of your fellow players, and after a while you don’t even consider writing certain parts or in certain styles, because the musicians you’re working with wouldn’t naturally go that way. You play to their strengths. You don’t try to reverse the river or get it to jump over a mountain, you harness its flow and energy to gently urge that it join up with other tributaries.
NOTE: This likely applies to most teams, not just musicians and bands
It’s not that technical abilities are beyond some players; it’s more the sharpening of the ear and brain that happens over time. We learn to hear (or not hear) certain things, different things. The classical players who think all popular music is simple tend not to hear the nuances involved, so naturally they can’t play very well in that style. Simplicity is a kind of transparency in which subtle nuances can have outsize effects. When everything is visible and appears to be dumb, that’s when the details take on larger meanings.
There’s a good chance you might be inspired by ideas that originate outside yourself.
Can eliminating some portion of the authorial voice make a piece of music more accessible and the singer more empathetic?
Is this disruption and destruction a risk worth taking? Did the piece just get ruined, or did it really need to get radically rethought in order to go somewhere new and exciting? You can’t be too precious in this process.
A lot of music stays relevant thanks to the opportunities for liberal interpretation by new artists.
If music can be regarded as an organizing principle—and in this case one that places equal weight on melody, rhythm, texture, and harmony—then we start to see metaphors everywhere we look. All kinds of natural phenomena are “musical.”
The unwritten rule in these remote collaborations is, for me, “Leave the other person’s stuff alone as much as you possibly can.” You work with what you’re given, and don’t try to imagine it as something other than what it is. Accepting that half the creative decision making has already been done has the effect of bypassing a lot of endless branching—not to mention a lot of waffling and worrying.
NOTE: Byrne is talking specifically about remote music collaboration but I bet this idea is transferable to other remote (and in-person) collaboration
Complete freedom is as much curse as boon; freedom within strict and well-defined confines is, to me, ideal.
“Emergence” is a popular term these days, but it almost perfectly evokes how musicians and songwriters cultivate the latent potential of a humble musical kernel. That’s why writers and musicians often say they feel only partially responsible for the creation of the works they’ve nurtured. They claim that the song, painting, dance piece, or words they’re working on “tells” them what kind of thing it wants to become.
NOTE: Seems tangentially related to the idea of not being overly precious of your art - let it speak and trust it for what it says it is
This implicit power gave me a kind of freedom. I could be flexible and accommodating to all the suggestions, and I could try things I wasn’t sure of, that I maybe even had doubts about, knowing that they weren’t going to be set in stone. Instead of making me conservative, my hidden power encouraged me to take risks.
NOTE: Transferable to other circumstatial positions of power
Words imply that the music is about what the words say, literally, and nothing more. If done poorly, they can destroy the pleasant ambiguity that constitutes much of the reason we love music. That ambiguity allows listeners to psychologically tailor a song to suit their needs, sensibilities, and situations, but words can limit that, too.
When we write, we access different aspects of ourselves, different characters, different parts of our brains and hearts. And then, when they’ve each had their say, we mentally switch hats, step back from accessing our myriad selves, and take a more distanced and critical view of what we’ve done.


CHAPTER EIGHT   Business and Finances
If we can do the mental gymnastics, separating this pragmatic knowledge from our enjoyment of music, then ideally this awareness of marketing campaigns might not spoil our enthusiasm.
The few indie stores that have survived have staffs that are knowledgeable, and they love the music and the musicians whose work they sell.
NOTE: How to survive as a company longterm in a creative industry
Having a variety of business choices is good for artists: it gives us more ways to make a living. And it’s good for audiences, too, who will have the opportunity for more—and more interesting—music to listen to.
Something about music urges us to engage with its larger context, beyond the piece of plastic it came on—it seems to be part of our genetic makeup that we can be so deeply moved by this art form. Music resonates in so many parts of the brain that we can’t conceive of it being an isolated thing. It’s whom you were with, how old you were, and what was happening that day. Trying to reduce and package such a changeable and unwieldly entity is ultimately futile. But many try.
marginal music tended to remain marginal because of economics and technology, rather than the quality of the music.

1. THE 360° DEAL
NOTE: Six distriubtion models with varying levels of artist control
At one end of the spectrum is the 360°, or equity, deal, where every aspect of an artist’s career is handled by producers, promoters, marketing people, lawyers, accountants, and managers.
The idea behind this model is that the artist can achieve wide saturation and massive sales because you are being boosted by a powerful machine working every angle—and they stand to profit from everything you do.
The artist in this model becomes a brand, owned and operated by the corporation, and in theory this encourages the company to adopt the long view because of enlightened self-interest.
As a general rule, as the cash comes in, creative control goes out.
As more artists sign these deals, we will have a hard time knowing whether or not we are listening to a song or a commercial—or whether there is any difference between the two.

2. STANDARD ROYALTY DEAL
In this model, the record company bankrolls the recording and handles the manufacturing, distribution, press, and promotion. The artist gets a percentage of record sales.
In a typical deal of this type, the record label owns the copyright to the recording. Forever. This doesn’t mean they own the “song,” though.
the song itself and the version that the artist recorded are not always the same thing.
There are two ways of handling a royalty deal, but they both come out more or less the same for the artist. In one form of accounting, artists get their percentage only after a lot of others get to the feed trough first. The other standard model involves the retailer and record company taking a lump sum off the top, with the artist receiving a fixed royalty on what’s left.
I believe it was the Beatles and other singer-songwriters of the sixties who realized that recording your own songs was far more lucrative than doing record after record covering other people’s songs, as had often been the norm in pop music. This incentivized songwriting, and it was partly due to this insight that there was suddenly an explosion of creativity and innovation in pop music in the sixties.
even not-so-good songs generate income from album sales, as long as there are a couple of hits on there that motivate folks to buy the whole album. The “filler” goes along for the ride and still generates money for the artists and publishers.
Over the last decade, many of the services traditionally provided by record labels under that standard deal began to be farmed out. Press and publicity, digital marketing, graphic design—all are now often handled by independent firms.

3. LICENSE DEAL
The license deal is similar to the standard deal, except that in this case the artist retains the copyright and ownership of the master recording.
The right to exploit the recording is licensed to the label for a limited period of time—usually seven years. After that, the rights (and income) from licensing those masters to TV shows, commercials, and the like revert to the artist.
The advance from the record company is necessarily lower, because the company won’t end up with the rights to the master recording in perpetuity.
The downside to this model is that the label may have less incentive to spend money to ensure that the record is a success.

4. PROFIT-SHARE DEAL
The profit-sharing deal often comes in the form of a 50/50 shared ownership of the master recording. Unlike the licensing deal, everything is shared—all the costs and expenses of producing an album are divided between the artist and the label.
In a profit-sharing deal, the mechanicals come out of the artist’s share, which makes some sense because the artist owns the master recordings and will stand to see additional income from possible licensing fees down the line.

5. P&D (OR M&D) DEAL
In the manufacturing and distribution (M&D) deal (also known as a production and distribution deal, or P&D), the artist does everything except, well, manufacture and distribute the product.
The artist pays for the recording, ads, marketing, and promotion—the record label or distribution entity isn’t expected to pay for any of that.
In this scenario, the artist gets absolute creative control, but it’s a bigger gamble. Getting the public to know about your record is almost entirely up to you.
This arrangement is different than a profit-sharing deal because the label is essentially relegated to being a vendor, and the artist either pays them a flat fee or offers them a fixed, modest percentage of the income—a commission—in exchange for what will be more limited services.
This sounds like one of the ways to go if you don’t hope or expect to sell too much of a given record. But you will see much more income from those units sold than you would from larger-scale distribution deals.

6. SELF-DISTRIBUTION
Finally, at the far end of the scale, is the self-distribution model, where the music is self-written, self-played, self-produced, and self-marketed. Do it yourself, all the way.
In its humblest form, self-distribution means CDs are pressed in limited numbers, and then sold at gigs and often through a website.
Within the limits of what can be afforded, the artists have complete and absolute creative control—not just of their music, but of how it is sold.
within this model are sub-models.
Artists doing it for themselves can actually make more money than the massive pop stars with a standard royalty deal, even though the sales numbers may seem minuscule by comparison. The debts accumulated paying off label advances and promotional expenses aren’t there in the DIY model, for starters.
if you don’t need a huge recording budget, tour support, and a big marketing effort, then this approach is worth exploring.
while distribution is moving online relatively quickly, getting the word out still requires some traditional marketing effort and muscle—and money.
One licensing deal can provide more income than a whole tour, and certainly more than royalties from CD sales through a label. Often a band or songwriter will feel it is necessary to give away some of their publishing for the cash in hand that will get them through their struggling years, but if you can hold on to that stuff, it turns out much better for you pretty quickly.
We read over and over that the music business is going down the drain, but this is actually a great time to be making music—full of possibility. A life in music—which is what we’re actually talking about, not just fame and glory—is indeed still possible.
the new model isn’t dogmatic or singular—it’s not even a fixed model. It’s more about mixing and matching according to one’s needs.
In the end, it needs to be remembered that corporations exist to sell shoes or sugary drinks, not art.


CHAPTER NINE   How to Make a Scene
the venue and its policies make a music scene happen as much as the creativity of the musicians.
you can sometimes tell in advance whether or not a given situation will develop into a vibrant scene.
it doesn’t depend entirely on the inspiration and creativity of the individuals hanging out there. A confluence of external factors helps encourage the latent talent in a community to flower.
1. THERE MUST BE A VENUE THAT IS OF APPROPRIATE SIZE AND LOCATION IN WHICH TO PRESENT NEW MATERIAL
2. THE ARTISTS SHOULD BE ALLOWED TO PLAY THEIR OWN MATERIAL
3. PERFORMING MUSICIANS MUST GET IN FOR FREE ON THEIR OFF NIGHTS (AND MAYBE GET FREE BEER TOO)
4. THERE MUST BE A SENSE OF ALIENATION FROM THE PREVAILING MUSIC SCENE
A successful scene presents an alternative.
The hangout, then, is the place for the alienated to share their misanthropic feelings about the prevailing musical culture.
Being forced to look outside of music was a good thing. It may have been done out of desperation, but it pushed everyone to make something new.
5. RENT MUST BE LOW—AND IT MUST STAY LOW
Cheap rent allows artists, musicians, and writers to live without much income during their formative years. It gives them time to develop, and it gives creative communities that nurture and support their members time to form.
6. BANDS MUST BE PAID FAIRLY
7. SOCIAL TRANSPARENCY MUST BE ENCOURAGED
The music might have been excellent, but there was no possibility for casual or chance encounters—people only saw what they bought a ticket to see.
NOTE: Regarding your typical venue with paid admission, stricter schedules, and band green rooms
You know a scene is developing when you hang out at a place and you have no idea who’s going to be playing.
8. IT MUST BE POSSIBLE TO IGNORE THE BAND WHEN NECESSARY
maybe not having to perform under intense scrutiny (it always seemed as if only the few folks in front were really paying attention) is important, even beneficial.
The rules I’ve enumerated aren’t hard and fast. Think of them as guidelines that can steer you away from what might at first seem like obvious or logical moves.
he rightly puts that first and points out how booking interesting and unexpected combinations of acts playing on the same bill can make musical connections happen in the listener’s head. He calls that vertical booking.
NOTE: Bill Bragin
Bill refers to what he did at Joe’s as horizontal booking. An audience member had to frequent the club over a number of nights throughout a season to really understand what was going on with this kind of booking. He’s right. Over time, if there is a real coherent sensibility behind the selection of acts, you eventually begin to sense that pattern, and you start to develop a kind of trust in the place.


CHAPTER TEN   Amateurs!
Music is made of sound waves that we encounter at specific times and places: they happen, we sense them, and then they’re gone. The music experience is not just those sound waves, but the context in which they occur as well.
The arts don’t exist in isolation. And of all the arts, music, being ephemeral, is the closest to being an experience more than it is a thing—it is yoked to where you heard it, how much you paid for it, and who else was there.
It can often seem that those in power don’t want us to enjoy making things for ourselves—they’d prefer to establish a cultural hierarchy that devalues our amateur efforts and encourages consumption rather than creation.
Capitalism tends toward the creation of passive consumers, and in many ways this tendency is counterproductive. Our innovations and creations, after all, are what keep many seemingly unrelated industries alive.
prehistorically early on—all art forms were communally made, which had the effect of reinforcing a group’s cohesion and thereby improving their chances of survival. In other words, writing (storytelling), music, and art had a practical use, from an evolutionary perspective.
In the modern age, though, people have come to feel that art and music are the product of individual effort rather than something that emerges from a community.
This is an interesting point, and it isn’t made very often. Sousa is saying that the gaps between performances might in some ways be just as important—socially, at least—as the performances themselves.
The “don’t give a shit” attitude of the amateur is another precious commodity.
Amateurism, or at least the lack of pretension associated with it, can be liberating.
This kind of compartmentalizing—separating one’s livelihood from one’s social aspirations—is part of the reason David Koch, the hidden hand behind a lot of ultraconservatives and, reportedly, the Tea Party movement in the United States, transforms himself into a respected arts patron by funding a theater at Lincoln Center, or why a Swiss bank that helps US depositors avoid paying taxes generously supports symphony halls and the ballet. It’s almost as if there are moral scales, and by tossing some loot on one side, you can balance out the precarious situation your reputation might be getting into on the other.
Reputation laundering works because it’s assumed that the folks who support fine music would be less likely to commit heinous crimes than the human flotsam that frequent a honky-tonk or a techno club.
Why not fund the venues where these young, emerging, and semi-amateur musicians can make and perform their own music? Why not invest in the future of music, instead of building fortresses to preserve its past?
We should broaden our idea of what culture is. In Japan, there used to be no word for art. There, the process of making and drinking a pot of tea evolved into what we in the West might say is an art form. This ritualized performance of a fairly mundane activity embodied a heightened version of a ubiquitous attitude—that utilitarian objects and activities, made and performed with integrity, consciously and mindfully, could be art.
some African societies have the same word for “art” and “play.” Even in English, we “play” an instrument. This attitude toward art and performance is in complete opposition to the Western idea of monuments and great works. It views culture as ephemeral and fleeting, like music. It’s an experience (again, like music), not an unchangeable fixed image. Music, in this view, is a way of living, a way of being in the world, not a thing you hold in your hand and play on a device.
Music can permanently change people’s lives in ways that go far beyond being emotionally or intellectually moved by a specific composition. That happens too, then it passes, and often something else lingers. Music is indeed a moral force, but mostly when it is part of the warp and woof of an entire community.
Music as social glue, as a self-empowering change agent, is maybe more profound than how perfectly a specific song is composed or how immaculately tight a band is.
“Essentially this is a system that fights poverty…A child’s physical poverty is overcome by the spiritual richness that music provides.”
NOTE: Founder Antonio Abreu on El Sistema
arts majors developed more creative problem-solving skills than students from almost any other area of study. Risk taking, dealing with ambiguities, discovering patterns, and the use of analogy and metaphor are skills that are not just of practical use for artists and musicians.
Creativity is a renewable resource that businesses can and do tap into. By this I don’t mean that businesses are looking for painters and composers, but that the habit of creative problem solving translates to any activity we find ourselves engaged in.
By encouraging the creativity of amateurs, rather than telling them that they should passively accept the creativity of designated masters, we help build a social and cultural network that will have profound repercussions.


CHAPTER ELEVEN   Harmonia Mundi
The relationships and intervals between notes that produce fifths, fourths, and sixths on these instruments correspond to consonant harmonies we still recognize. “Consonant,” in this case, means harmonies that are felt to be “stable” and settled, while dissonant harmonies are felt to be unstable, temporary, and “want” to move on to something else. Consonant, according to these discoveries, is what we as humans generally find harmonically comfortable to listen to, and this has led scientists to believe that we might have an innate biological predisposition toward certain musical relationships.
We have evolved many extremely specialized skills—physical and neurological—that seem to be related to music making. It’s something that must be important to our being Homo sapiens, and despite cultural differences, musical forms and structures are often shared.
Barbaro wrote that what harmony is for the ear, beauty is for the eye,
The Venn diagrams that contain spiritualist ideas, religious myths, and what we consider scientific fact do indeed overlap.
The question, then, is not only why do we like the harmonies we do, but also does our enjoyment of music—our ability to find a sequence of sounds emotionally affecting—have some neurological basis?
From an evolutionary standpoint, does enjoying music provide any advantage? Is music of any truly practical use, or is it simply baggage that got carried along as we evolved other more obviously useful adaptations?
Harmonics are the incidental notes that most instruments produce above and below the principal (or “fundamental”) note being played. These “ghost” notes are quieter than the main tone, and their number and variety are what give each instrument its characteristic sound.
Our vocalizations, and our ability to perceive their nuances and subtlety, co-evolved.
He also says that prior to the Renaissance in Europe there was no connection between sadness and minor keys—implying that cultural factors can override what might be somewhat weak, though real, biological correlations.
NOTE: Science writer Phillip Ball
A lot of the information we get comes from emphasized pitches (which might imply minor or major scales), spoken “melodies,” and the harmonics and timbre of the voice. We get emotional clues from these qualities just as much as from the words spoken.
NOTE: Re: speech
Our physical state and our emotional state are inseparable—by perceiving one, an observer can deduce the other.
Music, more than many of the arts, triggers a whole host of neurons. Multiple regions of the brain fire upon hearing music: muscular, auditory, visual, linguistic.
We can use music (or, for better or worse, others can use it) to regulate our emotions. We can pump ourselves (or others) up, or calm others (or ourselves) down. We can use music to help integrate ourselves with a team, to act in concord with a group. Music is social glue—it holds families, nations, cultures, and communities together. But it can tear them apart as well.
In the context of a ritual, there is no concept of an “original” creation of a piece of music, a composer, or a first performance. Such music is thought to have always been there, that it exists outside history, like a myth. Our task as performers and participants is simply to keep it alive. In this sense, music and the rituals it is part of keep the world going.
Marshall McLuhan famously proposed that after the Enlightenment and the Scientific Revolution, we shifted from an acoustic culture to a visual one. He said that in acoustic culture, the world, like sound, is all around you, and comes at you from all directions at once. It is multilayered and non-hierarchical; it has no center or focal point.
Visual culture has perspective—a vanishing point, a direction. In visual culture an image is in one very specific fixed spot: it’s in front of you. It isn’t everywhere at once.
In an acoustic universe one senses essence, whereas in a visual universe one sees categories and hierarchies.
He claims that in a visual universe one begins to think in a linear fashion, one thing following another along a timeline, rather than everything existing right now, everywhere, in the moment.
We’re fascinated and drawn to stuff that science can’t explain—the transcendent, the uncanny, things that affect us without words—and music both touches on and emanates from those mysteries. It reconnects us to that lost time of enchantment.
The world indeed offers us restricted possibilities and opportunities, but there are always options and more than one way for things to turn out.
we’ve come full circle: we’ve returned to the idea that our universe might be permeated with music.
Pinker mused in an email to me as we were planning our conversation, “I wonder whether music might be innate, not as a self-contained mental organ but rather as a consequence of the way that language, rhythm, emotion, and acoustic analysis are packed into the brain.”
We think we like the music, but what we really like is the company it puts us in.
In sync we become less individual and more part of a group. Our differences—personal, political, physical—become less significant and we can (or feel like we can) do things as a group that we could never do as individuals.
Music—played or enjoyed—physically brings us together to the extent that even our physiological processes come into sync; our heartbeats and breathing begin to align when we are all involved in the same piece of music.
Music, according to this idea, is part of the “geometry of beauty”
This geometry, when we spot it, is a visible—or in this case audible—signal that something might be valuable and important to us: it’s good to eat; it’s safe; it’s fertile; it’s related to us and our people.
